174 SKILLS
SKILL LIST
The skill list is sorted alphabetically
by skill name. Each entry gives the 
following information:
Name: The skill’s name.
Technological skills are noted as such;
e.g., “Machinist/TL.” Skills marked
with a dagger (†) require you to choose
a specialty (see Specialties, p. 169).
Type: The skill’s controlling attribute
and difficulty level; e.g., “IQ/Average.”
Defaults: The attributes or other
skills to which the skill defaults if you
have not studied it. Where there is
more than one possible default, use the
most favorable. Some skills have no
default – you cannot attempt to use
these skills if you don’t know them.
Prerequisites: Traits you must pos-
sess before you can spend points on the
skill. If the prerequisite is another skill,
you must have at least one point in that
skill. Not all skills have prerequisites.
Description: An explanation of what
the skill is for and how it works in play.
Modifiers: A list of common bonuses
and penalties for use of the skill. The
GM decides whether a particular mod-
ifier applies in a given situation. If an
advantage or disadvantage permanently
modifies base skill level rather than
simply giving a bonus or a penalty for a
specific task, add this permanent mod-
ifier to the skill level listed on your
character sheet.
Accounting
IQ/Hard
Defaults: IQ-6, Finance-4,
Mathematics (Statistics)-5, or
Merchant-5.
This is the ability to keep books of
account, to examine the condition of a
business, etc. A successful Accounting
roll (requires at least two hours of
study, and possibly months to audit a
large corporation) can tell you whether
financial records are correct, and possi-
bly reveal evidence of forgery, tamper-
ing, and similar criminal activity.
Modifiers: The time modifiers under
Time Spent (p. 346) often apply; the
Talents (p. 89) of Business Acumen and
Mathematical Ability both  provide a
bonus.
Acrobatics
DX/Hard
Default: DX-6.
This is the ability to perform gym-
nastic stunts, roll, take falls, etc. This
can be handy on an adventure, as
tightrope walking, human pyramids,
and trapeze swinging all have useful
applications. Each trick requires a sep-
arate skill roll, at whatever penalties the
GM sees fit. If you are performing
stunts on a moving vehicle or mount,
roll against the lower of Acrobatics and
the appropriate Driving or Riding skill.
You may substitute an Acrobatics
roll for a DX roll in any attempt to
jump, roll, avoid falling down, etc. As
well, you may attempt an Acrobatic
Dodge in combat – a jump or roll that
avoids an attack in a flashy way (see
Acrobatic Dodge, p. 375). Finally, a suc-
cessful Acrobatics roll will reduce the
effective distance of any fall by five
yards (see Falling, p. 431).
Two special versions of Acrobatics
are also available:
Aerobatics: The ability to execute
tight turns, loops, power dives, etc. in
flight. You must be able to fly to learn
this skill – although how you fly (magic,
wings, jet pack, etc.) is irrelevant.
Natural fliers might find flight to be as
effortless as humans find walking, but
they must still learn Aerobatics in order
to engage in complex acrobatics. Add
+2 to skill if you have 3D Spatial Sense
(p. 34).
Aquabatics: The ability to engage in
underwater acrobatics. Prerequisites:
Swimming, or the Amphibious advan-
tage (p. 40) or the Aquatic disadvantage
(p. 145).
Acrobatics, Aerobatics, and
Aquabatics default to one another at -4.
Add +1 to these three skills if you have
Perfect Balance (p. 74).
Acting
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5, Performance-2, or
Public Speaking-5.
This is the ability to counterfeit
moods, emotions, and voices, and to lie
convincingly over a period of time. A
successful Acting roll lets you pretend
to feel something that you do not. The
GM may also require an Acting roll
whenever you try to fool someone, play
dead in combat, etc.
Impersonation is a special type of
acting. To impersonate someone, you
must first successfully disguise yourself
(see Disguise, p. 187) – unless your vic-
tims cannot see you!
Note that Acting is not  the same
Fast-Talk (the art of the “quick con”) or
Performance (the skill of screen and
stage acting).
Modifiers:  +1 for every point of IQ
you have over the person you are trying
to fool (or the smartest one in the
group), or -1 for every point of differ-
ence if your victim is smarter than you;
-3 for Low Empathy (p. 142); -1 to -4
for Shyness (p. 154); -5 for Truthfulness
(p. 159), but only if you are trying to
deceive someone. For impersonation
only: -5 if you are not well acquainted
with your subject; -5 if those you wish
to fool are acquaintances of the subject
(-10 for close acquaintances).
Administration
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5 or Merchant-3.
This is the skill of running a large
organization. It is often a prerequisite
for high Rank (p. 29). A successful
Administration roll gives you a +2 reac-
tion bonus when dealing with a
bureaucrat, and allows you to predict
the best way to go about dealing with a
bureaucracy.
Aerobatics
see Acrobatics, above
Airshipman/TL
see Crewman, p. 185
Alchemy/TL
IQ/Very Hard
Defaults: None.
This is the study of magical trans-
formations and transmutations. In a
magical game world, an alchemist
would be able to identify concoctions
with magical effects (“elixirs”), such as




love potions and healing unguents,
and prepare them from suitable ingre-
dients. This is a mechanical process,
using the mana inherent in certain
things; therefore, those without
Magery can learn and use Alchemy,
and Magery confers no benefit.
Animal Handling†
IQ/Average
Default: IQ-5.
This is the ability to train and work
with animals. You must specialize in a
category of animals – the more intelli-
gent the animals, the narrower the
category. Examples of interest to
adventurers: Big Cats (jaguars, lions,
tigers, etc.), Dogs, Equines (horses
and donkeys), and Raptors (eagles,
falcons, and hawks). The default
between specialties is -2 within the
same order (e.g., Dogs to Big Cats), -4
across orders (e.g., Dogs to Equines),
and -6 for larger differences (e.g., Dogs
to Raptors).
To train an animal, make an
Animal Handling roll once per day of
training. A failed roll means the ani-
mal learned nothing; a badly failed
roll means you are attacked. The time
it takes to train an animal depends on
the beast’s intelligence and tractability
(see Chapter 16).
When working with a trained ani-
mal, roll against skill for each task you
set the animal. This roll is at -5 if the
animal is not familiar with you, -5 if
the circumstances are stressful to the
animal, and -3 or more if the task is a
complex one. To put on an entertaining
circus act, snake-charming show, etc.,
you must make a separate
Performance roll!
This skill can also (sometimes) be
used to quiet a wild, dangerous, or
untrained animal. This roll is at -5 if
the creature is wild or very frightened,
or -10 if it is a man-eater or man-killer.
Finally, this skill gives an advantage
in combat against animals within your
specialty. If you have Animal Handling
at level 15, an animal’s attack and
defense rolls are at -1 against you,
because you can predict its behavior.
At skill 20, the animal’s rolls are at -2.
Anthropology†
IQ/Hard
Defaults: IQ-6, Paleontology
(Paleoanthropology)-2, or Sociology-3.
This is the science of evolution and
culture. An anthropologist is knowl-
edgeable in the ways of primitive 
(and not-so-primitive) societies. An
Anthropology roll might explain, 
or even predict, unusual rituals and
folk customs. This skill requires 
specialization by species (if left
unspecified, assume the anthropolo-
gist’s own species). Specialties usually
default to one another at -2 to -5,
although there may be no default for
completely alien species.
SKILLS 175
Optional Rule: Wildcard Skills
The professor who has studied every science, the swordsman who can
fight with any blade . . . cinematic fiction is full of heroes who know a lit-
tle bit about everything in one broad area. The time required to list every
last skill such a hero might need, and the difficulty of figuring out which
skills to take (and which to use), might discourage many gamers from
playing cinematic experts. Such broad expertise doesn’t exist in real life,
but it is all part of the fun in cinematic games!
A solution to this problem is “wildcard skills” or “bang skills”: skills
that cover extremely broad categories of ability. The names of these skills
end in an exclamation point in order to distinguish them from normal
skills; e.g., “Science!” is the skill of “all science.” Wildcard skills include and
replace all  specific skills within their area. For instance, a hero could
attempt a Science! roll whenever the adventure calls for a roll against
Chemistry, Physics, or another science skill.
Wildcard skills that cover mainly intellectual pursuits are IQ-based,
while those that pertain chiefly to physical actions are DX-based. Such
skills have no default; to use them, you must spend points on them. Buy
wildcard skills as Very Hard skills, but at triple the usual point cost. For
instance, it would normally cost 8 points to buy an IQ/Very Hard skill at
IQ level, so Science! skill at IQ level would cost 24 points.
The GM might choose to limit wildcard skills to those with a suitable
Unusual Background – perhaps “Cinematic Hero.” This Unusual
Background should never be available to sidekicks and random thugs! To
give each hero a well-defined dramatic niche, the GM might wish to limit
PCs to one or two wildcard skills apiece (preferably those that emerge nat-
urally from their character stories).
Some examples:
Detective! (IQ). Replaces Criminology, Detect Lies, Electronics
Operation (Security and Surveillance), Forensics, Interrogation, Law,
Observation, Research, Savoir-Faire (Police), Search, Shadowing,
Streetwise, etc.
Gun! (DX). Replaces all specialties of Beam Weapons, Gunner, Guns,
and Liquid Projector, as well as all related Fast-Draw skills. Make an IQ-
based roll for Armoury pertaining to these weapons.
Science! (IQ). Replaces Astronomy, Bioengineering, Biology,
Chemistry, Engineer, Geology, Mathematics, Metallurgy, Meteorology,
Naturalist, Paleontology, Physics, Psychology, etc.
Sword! (DX). Replaces Broadsword, Force Sword, Jitte/Sai, Knife,
Main-Gauche, Rapier, Saber, Shortsword, Smallsword, and Two-Handed
Sword, as well as related Fast-Draw skills. Use in place of such skills as
Acrobatics and Jumping for physical stunts while fighting.
Wildcard skills are useful for omniproficient characters. Someone
who can pick up and play any instrument, or sight-read any choral work,
would have the Music! skill. If he’s gifted with several instruments and
can pick up others easily (but does have to learn them first), that’s the
Musical Ability Talent.




Aquabatics
see Acrobatics, p. 174
Archaeology
IQ/Hard
Default: IQ-6.
This is the study of ancient civiliza-
tions. An archaeologist is at home with
excavations, old potsherds, inscrip-
tions, etc. An Archaeology roll lets you
answer questions about ancient histo-
ry, or identify artifacts and dead lan-
guages. It might even reveal informa-
tion relating to the occult; e.g., Ancient
Secrets and Things Man Was Not
Meant To Know . . .
Architecture/TL
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5 or Engineer (Civil)-4.
This is the ability to design build-
ings, and to deduce the design of build-
ings from their function (and vice
versa). A successful Architecture roll
lets you learn things about a strange
building, find a secret room or door, etc.
Modifiers: -2 if the building is of a
strange type; -5 if it is alien.
Area Knowledge†
IQ/Easy
Defaults: IQ-4 or Geography
(Regional)-3*
* You have an IQ default only for Area
Knowledge of a place where you live
or once lived. Geography only gives a
default for Area Knowledge of the spe-
cialty region.
This skill represents familiarity
with the people, places, and politics of
a given region. You usually have Area
Knowledge only for the area you con-
sider your “home base,” whether that’s
a single farm or a solar system. If
information about other areas is avail-
able, the GM may allow you to learn
additional Area Knowledge skills.
The GM should not require Area
Knowledge rolls for ordinary situa-
tions; e.g., to find the blacksmith, tav-
ern, or your own home. But he could
require a roll to locate a smith to shoe
176 SKILLS
Skills such as Area Knowledge, Current Affairs
(Regional) (p. 186), Geography (Regional) (p. 198), and
History (p. 200) require specialization to specific places
and times. In reality, this kind of knowledge is never
“clear cut,” and tends to spill over into related areas.
The following penalties apply when you wish to use
such a skill outside your specialty.
Distance
For an area far from your “stomping grounds,” use
the penalties under Long-Distance Modifiers (p. 241).
However, the speed at which knowledge propagates
increases as progressively more powerful tools for man-
aging information appear: printing press, telephone, tel-
evision, computers, faster-than-light radio, etc. To
reflect this, at TL5 and above, the GM may choose to
roll 3d against TL+1 (e.g., 9 or less at TL8) to determine
whether you are familiar with the distant region from
TV, the Internet, etc. On a success, you may ignore all
distance penalties. (The GM might also wish to use this
rule to determine whether a character’s Reputation is
known far from home in a high-tech setting.)
Time
Time is usually only a concern for History skill – but
it could also apply to Area Knowledge skill in a time-
travel game, or if someone has been away from home
for a long time. Use the Long-Distance Modifiers once
again, substituting years for  miles. For each point of
tech-level difference, double the time modifier (a two-TL
difference would be ¥4, etc.). This is because societies
change drastically on all levels when technology
increases.
Area Class
“Area classes” are defined under Area Knowledge
skill: Neighborhood; Village or Town; City; Barony,
County, Duchy, or Small Nation; Large Nation; Planet;
Interplanetary State; and Galaxy. Area class becomes
important in campaigns that involve a lot of travel. We
assume here that the smaller areas are contained with-
in the larger ones.
If you have specialized in a larger area and want
information about a smaller area within it, the penalty
is -2 for one class of difference, -4 for two, -8 for three,
and so on, doubling each time.
If you have specialized in a smaller  area and want
information about a specific locale within the larger
area containing it, the most appropriate solution is usu-
ally to use the distance penalties described above.
However, questions having to do with the entire large
area use a flat -2 per difference in levels.
Example:  Someone with Area Knowledge (Earth)
would be at -8 – due to three classes of difference – to
know the mayor of Los Angeles. However, someone
with Area Knowledge (Los Angeles) would be at -4 to
know the location of Mount Rushmore. The same per-
son would be at -10 to know the location of the Library
of Congress in Washington, D.C.; the Library of
Congress has more to do with Washington than with the
United States as a whole, and it’s more appropriate to
resolve the question by considering distance.
Note that in a setting with multiple planes of exis-
tence, Area Knowledge skills for one reality can be dan-
gerously unreliable in another. The GM decides the
penalty that he will apply when you try to apply your
knowledge of your San Francisco to his version.
Geographical and Temporal Scope




your horse at 3 a.m., or to find the best
ambush spot along a stretch of road.
“Secret” or obscure information might
give a penalty, require a Hidden Lore
skill (p. 199), or simply be unavailable
– GM’s decision. For instance, Area
Knowledge of Washington, D.C. gives
you the location of the Russian
Embassy, but not the KGB’s current
safe house.
The information covered by Area
Knowledge often overlaps such skills
as Current Affairs, Geography,
Naturalist, and Streetwise. The differ-
ence is that Area Knowledge works for
a single area: you know the habits of
this tiger or gang boss, but have no
special insight into tigers or gangs in
general.
You can learn Area Knowledge for
any sort of area. The larger the territo-
ry, the less “personal” and more gener-
al your knowledge becomes. Almost
everyone will have Area Knowledge of
some type. The “canonical” area 
classes are:
Neighborhood:  For an urban area:
the residents and buildings of a few
city blocks. For a rural area: the inhab-
itants, trails, streams, hiding places,
ambush sites, flora, and fauna of a few
hundred acres.
Village or Town: All important citi-
zens and businesses, and most unim-
portant ones; all public buildings and
most houses.
City: All important businesses,
streets, citizens, leaders, etc.
Barony, County, Duchy, or Small
Nation: General nature of its settle-
ments and towns, political allegiances,
leaders, and most citizens of Status 5+.
Large Nation: Location of its major
cities and important sites; awareness
of its major customs, ethnic groups,
and languages (but not necessarily
expertise); names of folk of Status 6+;
and a general understanding of the
economic and political situation.
Planet: As for a large nation, but
more general; knowledge of people of
Status 7+ only.
Interplanetary State: Location of
major planets; familiarity with all
known races (but not necessarily
expertise); knowledge of people of
Status 7+; general understanding of
the economic and political situation.
Galaxy:  Location of the capitals 
of interplanetary states and the 
homeworlds of major races; general
awareness of all major races; knowl-
edge of individuals of Status 8; gener-
al understanding of relations between
interplanetary states.
Area Knowledge for anything larg-
er than a galaxy would be meaning-
lessly vague.
Your IQ-4 default applies to any of
these classes, as long as you have lived
in the area. Defaults are limited by
“common knowledge” at your tech
level! A TL0 hunter would have a
default for every level up to “Village or
Town,” while a TL8 student would
have defaults up to “Planet” level. You
must live in an interplanetary or inter-
stellar state to have defaults for levels
above “Planet.”
In some game worlds, Area
Knowledge specialties may exist for
parallel realities and other dimensions
– Area Knowledge (Cyberspace), Area
Knowledge (Dream Realms), etc. The
knowledge such skills provide is left to
the GM’s judgment.
SKILLS 177




Armoury/TL†
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5 or Engineer (same)-
4.
This is the ability to build, modify,
and repair a specific class of weapons
or armor. (It does not include skill at
design; for that, see Engineer, p. 190.)
A successful roll lets you find a prob-
lem, if it isn’t obvious; a second roll
lets you repair it. Time required is up
to the GM.
You  must  specialize in one of the
following fields:
Battlesuits:  All kinds of powered
armor, along with any built-in
weaponry.
Body Armor: Any kind of unpow-
ered personal armor (but not shields).
Also defaults to Smith (Bronze)-3 at
TL1, to Smith (Iron)-3 at TL2-4, and to
Machinist-3 at TL5+.
Force Shields: Any kind of force
screen or deflector – be it personal or
vehicular. This is the same skill as
Electronics Repair (Force Shields).
Heavy Weapons: All weapons used
with the Artillery and Gunner skills.
Melee Weapons: Any weapon used
with a Melee Weapon or Thrown
Weapon skill, as well as all kinds of
shields. Also defaults to Smith
(Bronze)-3 at TL1, to Smith (Iron)-3 at
TL2-4, and to Machinist-3 at TL5+.
Missile Weapons: Man-portable,
pre-gunpowder projectile weapons of
all kinds – bows, crossbows, slings, etc.
Small Arms: All weapons used with
the Beam Weapons and Guns skills.
Also defaults to Machinist-5 at TL5+.
Vehicular Armor: All kinds of
armored vehicle hulls.
Most specialties default to one
another at -4 – but above TL4, there is
no default between Armoury special-
ties dealing with armor and Armoury
specialties dealing with weapons. The
technologies covered by each specialty
vary with TL. For instance, Armoury
(Small Arms) covers black-powder
small arms at TL4, repeating small
arms that fire cartridges at TL6,
“smart” infantry weapons at TL8, and
portable beam weapons at TL10.
The GM should strictly enforce
penalties for unfamiliarity.
Armoury/TL10 (Small Arms) might
cover both beam weapons and
portable railguns, but going from one
to the other gives you -2 to skill until
you familiarize yourself with all the
differences.
Modifiers: -2 for an unfamiliar item
within your specialty (e.g., plate
armor when you’re used to mail);
equipment modifiers (p. 345).
Artillery/TL†
IQ/Average
Default: IQ-5.
This is the ability to use a heavy
weapon, such as a trebuchet or a how-
itzer, for indirect  fire – that is, to put
fire onto a target area via a high bal-
listic arc or similar path. For direct
fire, use Gunner skill (p. 198). Roll
against Artillery skill to bombard the
target.
Loaders can make ST-based
Artillery rolls to improve the rate of
fire of certain crew-served heavy
weapons. See the appropriate weapon
description for details.
You  must  specialize by weapon
type. The available specialties vary by
TL, but include one or more of:
Beams: Any kind of heavy energy
weapon that is fired from orbit,
bounced off a mirror, or otherwise
used against targets you cannot see.
Bombs: All kinds of unpowered,
free-falling munitions.
Cannon: Any kind of heavy projec-
tile weapon – bombard, howitzer,
naval gun, etc.
Catapult:  Any kind of indirect-fire
mechanical siege engine, such as a tre-
buchet.
Guided Missile: Any kind of seeking
or remotely piloted missile.
Torpedoes: Any kind of powered
underwater projectile.
There is no default between spe-
cialties, some of which (e.g.,
Torpedoes) cover weapons that bear
little or no resemblance to true
artillery. Artillery is a single skill only
because all the weapons it covers use
the same rules.
The weapons covered by each spe-
cialty will vary by TL. For instance,
Artillery (Cannon) would cover primi-
tive bombards at TL3, brass cannon at
TL4, breech-loading howitzers at TL6,
and orbital railguns at TL9+.
Familiarity is crucial here! Artillery
(Cannon) covers both 81mm infantry
mortars and 406mm naval guns, but
going from one to the other will give -2
for weapon type (81mm vs. 406mm),
-2 for fire-control (visual spotting vs.
fire-direction center), and -2 for
mount (bipod vs. naval turret), for a
total of -6 to skill until you familiarize
yourself with all the differences.
178 SKILLS




Note that Forward Observer skill
(p. 196) is generally required to desig-
nate targets for Artillery skill.
Modifiers:  All relevant combat
modifiers; -2 for an unfamiliar fire-
control system (e.g., map coordinates
when you’re used to satellite imagery)
or mount (e.g., a naval turret when
you’re used to emplaced guns), or for
an unfamiliar weapon of a known type
(e.g., 155mm when you are used to
203mm); -4 or more for a weapon in
bad repair.
Artist†
IQ/Hard
Default: IQ-6.
This skill represents talent at a
visual art. A successful roll might let
you create a recognizable likeness of a
person or an object, or a work beauti-
ful enough to sell (the GM should not
allow a default roll for this use!). Time
required is up to the GM.
Artist is based on IQ, but there are
many situations in which the GM
could logically ask for a DX-based roll,
in which case modifiers for High
Manual Dexterity (p. 59) or Ham-
Fisted (p. 138) would apply. In rare
cases, even a ST-based Artist roll might
make sense – for instance, to work
with a physically tough material.
You must specialize in an art form.
Common specialties include:
Body Art: Tattooing, piercing, and
scarification. Both this specialty and
Painting suffice for henna or tempo-
rary tattoos, but cosmetic surgery
requires Surgery skill (p. 223).
Calligraphy:  Beautiful and decora-
tive handwriting. You need not be lit-
erate!
Drawing: All forms of charcoal, ink,
pastel, and pencil work.
Illumination:  Decorating written
text with miniature paintings and pic-
tures.
Illusion:  Creating believable or
evocative illusions. Prerequisite: magi-
cal or psionic illusion ability of some
kind.
Interior Decorating: Creating pleas-
ing building interiors by selecting
appropriate paints, fixtures, and 
furniture. Default: Architecture-3.
Painting:  All forms of painting,
whether on paper, canvas, or a wall,
and whether with tempera, oil-based
paint, or something more exotic (like
blood).
Pottery: Working with various sorts
of ceramics – especially clay.
Scene Design: Designing sets for the
stage. Default: Architecture-3.
Sculpting: Creating three-dimen-
sional art from ivory, stone, metal, etc.
Woodworking:  All forms of fine
woodwork, including cabinet-making
and decorative carving. Default:
Carpentry-3.
Calligraphy, Drawing, Illumina-
tion, and Painting default to one
another at -2, and to or from Body Art
at -4. Interior Decorating, Scene
Design, and Woodworking default
among themselves at -4. All other
Artist specialties default to one anoth-
er at -6.
An artist of any kind can take a fur-
ther  optional  specialty (p. 169) in a
particular medium or technique.
Many Artist specialties are used to
earn a living rather than to create fine
art, and some people regard them as
“craft” skills, not “art” skills. It is up to
you whether you focus on beauty, real-
ism, or functionality.
Modifiers: Equipment modifiers (p.
345); -2 if the medium is unfamiliar
(e.g., tempera when you are used to
oils); -5 if the medium is difficult (e.g.,
marble, for a sculptor).
Astronomy/TL
IQ/Hard
Default: IQ-6.
Prerequisite: Mathematics
(Applied).
This is the study of stars and other
extraplanetary objects. An astronomer
could answer questions about the
Sun, the planets of the solar system,
etc. An amateur who can locate stars
and use a telescope, but not perform
involved calculations, has an optional
specialty (p. 169): Astronomy
(Observational). This specialty does
not  require Mathematics as a 
prerequisite.
Autohypnosis
Will/Hard
Default: Meditation-4.
This skill allows you to tap reserves
of inner strength by entering a trance-
like state. It requires a concentration
period of (20 - skill) seconds, mini-
mum one second. You cannot talk or
move during the initiation of the
trance state. A successful skill roll
allows you to do one of the following:
Improve Concentration. You get +2
to skill to perform a specific, lengthy
mental task (e.g., break a code or write
a computer program), but -2 to all
unrelated IQ, Perception, and skill
rolls. The task must be a relatively
sedate one, done in a quiet place
(library, lab, monastery, or placid
wilderness).
Increase Will. You get +2 to Will (+5
on a critical success) for one hour.
This applies to all attempts to resist
interrogation, torture, or magical or
psionic attack. This roll is at -2.
Negate Pain/Fatigue. Cancels the
negative effects of being reduced to
less than 1/3 of your FP or HP (but not
the fatigue or injury itself). This roll is
at -4, and you may only make one
attempt per hour.
Axe/Mace
see Melee Weapon, p. 208
Battlesuit/TL
see Environment Suit, p. 192
Beam Weapons/TL†
DX/Easy
Default: DX-4.
This is the ability to use beam
small arms. You must  specialize by
weapon type:
Pistol:  Any handgun that fires an
energy or particle beam.
Projector: Any energy weapon that
emits an area-effect cone or field.
Rifle:  Any long arm that fires an
energy or particle beam.
These specialties default to one
another at -4. Treat specific beam
types (blaster, laser, stunner, etc.) as
familiarities. Other modifiers are as
per  Guns (p. 198). In settings with
both beam and projectile weapons,
the Pistol and Rifle specialties of
Beam Weapons default to the similar-
ly named Guns specialties at -4, and
vice versa.
See  Artillery (p. 178) and Gunner
(p. 198) for heavier beam weapons.
SKILLS 179




Bicycling
DX/Easy
Defaults: DX-4 or Driving
(Motorcycle)-4.
This is the ability to ride a bicycle
long distances, at high speeds, in ral-
lies, etc. Roll at +4 if all you want to do
is struggle along without falling off.
An IQ-based Bicycling roll allows you
to make simple repairs, assuming
tools and parts are available.
Bioengineering/TL†
IQ/Hard
Default: Biology-5.
This is the ability to engineer living
organisms with specific characteris-
tics, or to create biotechnological
products. You must specialize:
Cloning: The creation and growth
of clones.
Genetic Engineering: The manipu-
lation and modification of genes.
Tissue Engineering: The manufac-
ture of organs and tissues.
These specialties default to each
other at -4.
Biology/TL†
IQ/Very Hard
Defaults: IQ-6 or Naturalist-6.
This is the scientific study of the
structure, behavior, and habitats of liv-
ing organisms. You must specialize in
the life of a particular planet type (see
box). If you do not specify a planet
type, your native planet type is
assumed. The IQ default applies only
to the planet type you grew up on. The
default between different planet-type
specialties is -4.
At TL6+, most biologists have an
optional specialty (p. 169) as well. The
most common options are biochem-
istry (the study of the chemical reac-
tions that sustain life), botany (the
study of plants), ecology (the study of
environments), genetics (the study of
heredity and genomes), marine biolo-
gy (the study of ocean life), microbiol-
ogy (the study of microscopic organ-
isms), and zoology (the study of ani-
mals), but more obscure specialties
are possible.
Blind Fighting
Per/Very Hard
Defaults: None.
Prerequisites: Trained By A Master
or Weapon Master.
You have learned to fight blindfold-
ed or in absolute darkness. As a result,
you can “sense” your targets without
having to see them.
This skill enables you to use senses
other than vision – mainly hearing, but
also touch and even smell – to pinpoint
exactly where your opponents are. A
successful roll allows one melee attack
or active defense without any penalties
for lighting (even total darkness),
blindness (temporary or permanent),
or an invisible foe. However, attacks
made in total darkness, while blind, or
against invisible enemies have an extra
-2 to target specific hit locations.
If you also know Zen Archery
(p. 228), you can shoot targets without
seeing them by making rolls on both
skills at -6.
An opponent who knows you pos-
sess this ability can foil it by winning a
Quick Contest of Stealth-4 vs. your
Blind Fighting each turn. If he wins,
you cannot detect him. However,
Invisibility Art (p. 202) never works on
you; it is completely useless against
this skill.
Modifiers:  Background noise gives
a penalty: -1 for rain, -2 for heavy rain
or a storm, -3 for a crowded, noisy
area or heavy machinery, -4 for a full
football stadium, or -5 in the middle of
an artillery barrage. If you cannot hear
at all, the roll is at -7, but you may still
attempt a roll, as the skill is not com-
pletely based on hearing. Add your
level of Acute Hearing to the roll. Add
the higher of your ESP Talent (p. 256)
or Telepathy Talent (p. 257).
Blowpipe
DX/Hard
Default: DX-6.
This is the ability to use a blow-
pipe. You can use this weapon to
shoot small, usually poisoned, darts.
You can also use it to blow powders at
targets within one yard. Treat this as a
melee attack, not as a ranged attack.
Such attacks are always at +2 to hit.
Modifiers: -2 and up for wind, if
outdoors.
Boating/TL†
DX/Average
Defaults: DX-5 or IQ-5.
This is the ability to handle a spe-
cific type of small watercraft. For large
vessels that require multiple crewmen
on a “bridge,” use Seamanship (see
Crewman, p. 185) and Shiphandling
(p. 220).
Make a roll to get underway, to
dock, and whenever you encounter a
hazard. If using this skill at default,
180 SKILLS
Planet Types
Biology, Geology (p. 198), and Meteorology (p. 209) require you to spe-
cialize by “planet type,” as does the “Physical” specialty of Geography
(p. 198). If you do not specify a planet type, your native planet type is
assumed – so if the campaign will never leave your home world, save
space and just write “Geology,” “Biology,” etc. GURPS sorts planets into
six broad categories for these purposes.
Earthlike: Essentially, all habitable worlds.
Gas Giants: Jupiter/Uranus types.
Hostile Terrestrial: Venus types.
Ice Dwarfs: Comets and small moons composed almost entirely of
snow or ice.
Ice Worlds: Rock worlds covered by a frozen “ocean.”
Rock Worlds: Most moons, asteroids, etc.
Unless otherwise specified, all planet-type specialties for a given skill
default to one another at -4.




also roll when you first enter the boat
– to avoid falling in the water!
You must specialize:
Large Powerboat: Any boat with an
enclosed cabin and an inboard motor.
Includes cabin cruisers, houseboats,
and patrol boats. Defaults: Motorboat-
2, Sailboat-4, or Unpowered-4. This
specialty (only) also defaults to
Seamanship-4.
Motorboat:  Any open powerboat –
notably speedboats and any of the
boats used with the Sailboat or
Unpowered specialty when outfitted
with an outboard motor. Defaults:
Large Powerboat-2, Sailboat-3, or
Unpowered-3.
Sailboat:  Any small watercraft
moving under sail. Defaults: Large
Powerboat-4, Motorboat-3, or
Unpowered-3.
Unpowered:  Any small watercraft
that relies on muscle power, whether it
is paddled, rowed, or poled. Includes
canoes, rowboats, and rafts. Defaults:
Large Powerboat-4, Motorboat-3, or
Sailboat-3.
Modifiers: -2 for an unfamiliar boat
within your specialty (e.g., a kayak
when you’re used to a rowboat); -3 or
worse for foul weather, navigational
hazards, etc.
Body Control
HT/Very Hard
Defaults: None.
Prerequisites: Trained By A Master,
Breath Control, and Meditation.
This ability lets you affect involun-
tary bodily functions such as heart
rate, blood flow, and digestion. One
use of this skill is to enter a deathlike
trance, during which only those who
can win a Quick Contest of Diagnosis
vs. your Body Control skill even real-
ize that you are alive. This requires (30
- skill) seconds of concentration, min-
imum one second.
You can also use this skill to flush
poisons from your body. To do so, you
must first roll against Poisons (or
Alchemy, Pharmacy, etc., as appropri-
ate) to identify the poison. You cannot
attempt this roll until you know you
have been poisoned. In most cases,
you only discover this when the first
symptoms show! A successful Body
Control roll – adjusted by any modifi-
er to the HT roll to resist the poison –
flushes the poison in 1d hours, after
which it has no further effect.
Finally, you may use the higher  of
this skill and basic HT to resist any
Affliction, magic spell, or psionic
attack that is normally resisted by HT.
Body Language
Per/Average
Defaults: Detect Lies-4 or
Psychology-4.
This is the ability to interpret a
person’s facial expressions and body
posture in order to gauge his feelings.
You can use it like the Empathy
advantage (p. 51) or Detect Lies skill
(p. 187), but only on a subject you can
see. You can also use it to get a rough
idea of what a party member is doing
or about to do in a situation where he
cannot communicate with you direct-
ly (for instance, when using Stealth).
You can only observe one subject at a
time.
The ability to read body language
in  combat is a standard part of any
Melee Weapon or unarmed combat
skill; see Feint (p. 365).
Modifiers:  All Vision modifiers;
physiology modifiers (see box); +4 if
your subject is Easy to Read (p. 134).
Anything that makes the subject hard-
er to “read” gives a penalty: 
baggy clothing gives -1, a shield or a
voluminous cloak gives from -2 to -4,
and a mask gives -5 (and makes it
impossible to use this skill if you 
cannot see the rest of the body!).
Body Sense
DX/Hard
Defaults: DX-6 or Acrobatics-3.
This is the ability to adjust quickly
after teleportation or similar “instant
movement.” A successful roll lets you
act normally on your next turn. A
failed roll means disorientation: you
may take no action other than defense
for one turn. A critical failure means
you fall down, physically stunned!
Modifiers:  +3 for either level of
Absolute Direction (p. 34). -2 if you
changed facing, or -5 if you went from
vertical to horizontal or vice versa
(you cannot change posture  during a
teleport – only orientation).
Bolas
DX/Average
Defaults: None.
This is the ability to throw the
bolas: a length of cord with two or
more weights attached. Its primary
uses are to stop herd animals and to
hunt small game, but it can also
entangle opponents in combat. See
Special Ranged Weapons (p. 410) for
bolas rules.
SKILLS 181
Physiology Modifiers
The following skills deal with the health, function, or vital points of liv-
ing beings: Body Language, Diagnosis (p. 187), First Aid (p. 195),
Physician (p. 213), Pressure Points (p. 215), Pressure Secrets (p. 215), and
Surgery (p. 223). These skills work as written when working with mem-
bers of your species. When dealing with a member of another species,
apply the following modifiers:
Species with similar physiology: -2 (human vs. Elf) to -4 (human vs.
troll).
Species with very different physiology, but still from your world: -5. This
includes all normal animals.
Utterly alien species: -6 or worse (GM’s option).
Machine: No roll possible! These skills do not work at all on creatures
with the Machine meta-trait (p. 263).
A successful roll against a suitable skill lets you avoid these penalties.
This roll is usually against the relevant racial specialty of Physiology,
although Biology-4 suffices for common animals.




Bow
DX/Average
Default: DX-5.
This is the ability to use the long-
bow, short bow, and all similar bows.
It also covers the compound bow,
although a person who had never seen
a compound bow would suffer a -2
unfamiliarity penalty.
Boxing
DX/Average
Defaults: None.
This is the skill of trained punch-
ing. Roll against Boxing to hit with a
punch. Boxing does not improve kick-
ing ability – use Brawling (p. 182) or
Karate (p. 203) for that.
Boxing improves damage: if you
know Boxing at DX+1 level, add +1 per
die to basic thrust damage when you
calculate punching damage. Add +2
per die if you know Boxing at DX+2 or
better! Work out damage ahead of
time and record it on your character
sheet.
When you defend with bare hands,
Boxing allows you to parry two differ-
ent  attacks per turn, one with each
hand. Your Parry score is (skill/2) + 3,
rounded down. Boxing parries are at
-2 vs. kicks and -3 vs. weapons other
than thrusting attacks. Boxing also
gives an improved retreating bonus
when you parry; see Retreat (p. 377).
For more on barehanded parries, see
Parrying Unarmed (p. 376).
Brain Hacking
see Brainwashing, below
Brainwashing/TL
IQ/Hard
Defaults: Special.
Prerequisite: Psychology.
This is the “black art” of technolog-
ical personality alteration and mind
control. Only intelligence, military,
and security services teach it – and
only to individuals with suitable Rank
or Security Clearance. Even then, it is
rare outside police states (except per-
haps during wartime).
Brainwashing encompasses many
techniques – some proven, others little
better than witchcraft. Depending on
the setting, these might include drugs,
electroshock, hypnotism, sensory 
deprivation, sleep deprivation, social
pressure, subliminal messages, or sur-
gery . . . and most likely a combination
of several of these.
Regardless of the techniques
employed, brainwashing is handled as
a Regular Contest (not  a Quick
Contest) between Brainwashing skill
and the victim’s Will. Roll once per
day. Obviously, the brainwasher has a
tremendous advantage: even if the vic-
tim wins this time, it is only a matter
of time before he slips.
Results depend on how effective
the GM deems brainwashing to be,
but might include insanity, personality
alteration, or suggestions that can be
triggered by future events. In game
terms, the victim can acquire almost
any mental quirk or disadvantage.
In settings where neural interfaces
exist, it might be possible to “hack” the
victim’s brain using a computer. This
takes only a fraction of a second per
attempt! Brain Hacking should be
treated as its own skill, with Computer
Hacking instead of Psychology as a
prerequisite.
This skill normally has no default.
However, GMs who wish to explore the
gory details can specify the techniques
used in their campaign and have
Brainwashing default to one or more
of Electronics Operation (Medical)-6,
Hypnotism-6, Interrogation-6,
Pharmacy-6, Psychology-6, or Surgery-
6, as appropriate.
Brawling
DX/Easy
Defaults: None.
This is the skill of “unscientific”
unarmed combat. Roll against
Brawling to hit with a punch, or
Brawling-2 to hit with a kick.
Brawling can also replace DX when
you attack with teeth, claws, horns, or
other “natural weapons.”
Brawling improves damage: if you
know Brawling at DX+2 level or bet-
ter, add +1 per die to basic thrust dam-
age when you calculate damage with
Brawling attacks – punches, kicks,
claws, bites, etc. Work out damage
ahead of time and record it on your
character sheet.
Brawling includes the ability to use
the blackjack or sap. An attack with
such a fist load is considered a punch
at +1 to damage.
When you defend with bare hands,
Brawling allows you to parry two dif-
ferent attacks per turn, one with each
hand. Your Parry score is (skill/2) + 3,
rounded down. Brawling parries are
at -3 vs. weapons other than thrusting
attacks. For more on barehanded par-
ries, see Parrying Unarmed (p. 376).
Breaking Blow
IQ/Hard
Defaults: None.
Prerequisite: Trained By A Master.
This skill allows you to find the
weakest spot in any object when mak-
ing a barehanded attack. Each attack
requires a separate Breaking Blow
roll. Roll against skill after  you hit.
Breaking Blow costs 1 FP per attempt,
whether or not you hit.
On a success, your attack gains an
armor divisor of (5) against any
braced, inanimate, homogenous tar-
get (see Injury to Unliving,
Homogenous, and Diffuse Targets,
p. 380), and you may treat the target
as if it were Fragile (Brittle) (p. 136)
for this one attack. 
In a cinematic game, you are not
limited to inanimate targets. Your
armor divisor affects any artificial
armor or force field (not natural DR),
and you may treat homogenous oppo-
nents as if they were Fragile (Brittle)!
On a failure, your attack gains no
special benefits. On a critical failure,
you do the damage to your own hand
or foot.
Modifiers: -10 if used instantly,
dropping to -5 after 1 turn of concen-
tration, -4 after 2 turns, -3 after 4
turns, -2 after 8 turns, -1 after 16
turns, and no penalty after 32 turns. -1
if your target is wood or plastic, -3 if
brick or stone, or -5 if metal or high-
tech composites.
Breath Control
HT/Hard
Defaults: None.
This is the ability to breathe at
maximum efficiency. On a successful
skill roll, you can increase the time
you can hold your breath for any rea-
son (e.g., underwater) by 50%, or
regain one FP in only two minutes
(you cannot combine this with magic
spells that restore FP).
182 SKILLS




Broadsword
see Melee Weapon, p. 208
Camouflage
IQ/Easy
Defaults: IQ-4 or Survival-2.
This is the ability to use natural
materials, special fabrics and paints,
etc. to hide yourself, your position, or
your equipment. To see through your
camouflage, an observer must win a
Quick Contest of Vision or Observation
skill (p. 211) vs. your Camouflage skill.
Depending on the circumstances,
successful camouflage might hide its
subject entirely or merely blur its out-
lines to make it harder to hit (-1 to
attacker’s skill). Camouflage will not
improve your Stealth roll, but if you
fail a Stealth roll while camouflaged,
those who heard you must still see
through your camouflage to see you.
Modifiers:  Equipment modifiers
(p. 345). Apply a penalty equal to the
Size Modifier of a large object (e.g., -5
for a tank with SM +5). This makes it
difficult to camouflage large objects,
but remember that distant observers
suffer large Vision penalties for range
– see Vision (p. 358).
Captivate
see Enthrallment, p. 191
Carousing
HT/Easy
Default: HT-4.
This is the skill of socializing, par-
tying, etc. A successful Carousing roll,
under the right circumstances, gives
you a +2 bonus on a request for aid or
information, or just on a general reac-
tion. A failed roll means you made a
fool of yourself in some way; you get a
-2 penalty on any reaction roll made
by those you caroused with. If you do
your carousing in the wrong places, a
failed roll can have other dangers!
Modifiers:  Up to +3 for buying
drinks or other entertainment for 
your fellow carousers; -3 for Killjoy
(p. 140); -3 for Low Empathy (p. 142);
-1 to -4 for Shyness (p. 154).
Carpentry
IQ/Easy
Default: IQ-4.
This is the ability to build things
out of wood. A successful roll lets you
do one hour’s worth of competent car-
pentry. A failed roll means the work
was bad. The GM may require DX-
based Carpentry rolls for certain kinds
of fine work.
Modifiers:  Equipment modifiers
(p. 345); +5 if you are being supervised
or assisted by someone with skill 15 or
better.
Cartography/TL
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5, Geography (any)
-2, Mathematics (Surveying)-2, or
Navigation (any)-4.
This is the ability to create and
interpret maps and charts. Roll
against this skill to map any location
as you move through it. At TL7+, this
skill includes knowledge of computer
mapping techniques and generating
maps from sensor information.
Chemistry/TL
IQ/Hard
Default: IQ-6 or Alchemy-3.
This is the study of matter. A
chemist can identify elements and sim-
ple compounds (but not necessarily
drugs, magical substances, etc.). Given
proper equipment, he could conduct
complex analyses and syntheses.
Climbing
DX/Average
Default: DX-5.
This is the ability to climb moun-
tains, rock walls, trees, the sides of
buildings, etc. See Climbing  (p. 349)
for details.
Modifiers: +2 for Brachiator (p. 41);
+3 for Flexibility or +5 for Double-
Jointed (p. 56); +1 for Perfect Balance
(p. 74); a penalty equal to encum-
brance level (e.g., -1 for Light 
encumbrance).
SKILLS 183




Cloak
DX/Average
Defaults: DX-5, Net-4, or Shield
(any)-4.
This is the skill of using a cloak or
a cape as a weapon. It covers the use
of two types of cloak: the waist-length
“light cloak” (any cloak, cape, or coat
weighing less than 5 lbs.) and the full-
length “heavy cloak” (any cloak weigh-
ing 5 lbs. or more).
Offensively, you can use a cloak to
entangle an opponent – see Special
Melee Weapon Rules (p. 404) for
details. You can also snap a cloak in
your opponent’s face or simply use it
to block his vision, either of which
counts as a Feint maneuver.
Defensively, a cloak works much
like a shield. It provides a Defense
Bonus (+1 if light, +2 if heavy) and
gives a Block defense equal to (skill/2)
+ 3, rounded down. A cloak is not as
robust as a shield, though! A light
cloak has only DR 1 and 3 HP, while a
heavy cloak has DR 1 and 5 HP.
Combat Art or Sport
DX/Varies
Defaults: Special.
You can opt to learn most combat
skills in nonlethal forms aimed at
either exhibition (Combat Art skill) or
competition (Combat Sport skill).
Combat Art skills emphasize
graceful movements and perfect
stances. Since these skills still give a
default to full-fledged, lethal combat
skills (see below), they are a logical
choice for Pacifists who want some
combat ability.
Combat Sport skills concentrate on
speed of movement and nondamaging
attacks. A failed skill roll means a foul
that might disqualify you from a tour-
nament! You can make an IQ-based
roll against Combat Sport to recall
basic tournament rules, but to become
a qualified judge or referee, learn the
relevant Games skill (p. 197).
Combat Art and Sport skills are
DX-based, with the same difficulty
level and defaults as the correspon-
ding combat skill. A combat skill, its
Art form, and its Sport form default
among themselves at -3. For instance,
Staff Art and Staff Sport are
DX/Average skills that default to DX-5,
just like Staff skill (p. 208). A fighter
with Staff at 15 would have default
Staff Art and Staff Sport skills of 12,
while an athlete with Staff Sport at 15
would have Staff and Staff Art skills at
12 by default.
Computer Hacking/TL
IQ/Very Hard
Defaults: None.
Prerequisite: Computer
Programming.
This is the skill of gaining illegal
access to a computer system – usually
using another computer over a com-
munications network. A successful
Computer Hacking roll allows you to
gain surreptitious access to a system,
or to find (or change) information on
a system you have already broken
into. On a critical failure, you fail to
gain access and leave some sort of
incriminating evidence of your
attempt.
This skill is cinematic, and simu-
lates the way computer intrusion
works in many movies and novels. It
does not exist in realistic settings!
Realistic “hackers” should learn a
combination of Computer Operation
(to exploit OS loopholes and run
intrusion software), Computer
Programming (to write intrusion soft-
ware), Cryptography, Electronics
Operation (Communications or
Surveillance), Electronics Repair
(Computers), Fast-Talk (to convince
legitimate users to reveal passwords),
Research (to find documented securi-
ty holes), and Scrounging (to
“Dumpster dive” for manuals, pass-
words on discarded sticky notes, etc.).
Modifiers:  Equipment modifiers
(p. 345). -1 to -10 if you have been
away from the field for a long time
and have not had a chance to become
familiar with the changes. Security
measures give a penalty, from -1 for
the cheapest commercial security soft-
ware to -15 for the latest technology.
Some measures resist your intrusion
attempt; treat this as a Quick Contest
of Hacking vs. the effective skill of the
defenses.
Computer Operation/TL
IQ/Easy
Default: IQ-4.
This is the ability to use a comput-
er: call up data, run programs, play
games, etc. It is the only computer
skill needed by most end users. Learn
Computer Programming (below) to
write software and Electronics Repair
(Computers) (p. 190) to troubleshoot
hardware.
This skill only exists in game
worlds with computers. Individuals
from settings without computers can-
not even use it by default until they
have had time to gain familiarity with
computers! In settings where it is pos-
sible to “jack” your brain into a com-
puter, Computer Operation includes
the ability to use a neural interface,
but new users initially suffer a -4
penalty for unfamiliarity (see
Familiarity, p. 169).
Modifiers: -2 or more for an unfa-
miliar computer, operating system, or
program.
Computer
Programming/TL
IQ/Hard
Defaults: None.
This is the ability to write and
debug computer software. A success-
ful roll lets you find a bug in a pro-
gram, determine a program’s purpose
by examining the code, answer a ques-
tion about computer programming, or
write a new program (time required is
up to the GM).
In settings where artificial intelli-
gence (AI) exists, those who wish to
work with AI must learn Computer
Programming (AI). There is no default
between this skill and regular
Computer Programming. When using
Detect Lies, Fast-Talk, Psychology,
Teaching, and similar “social” skills on
an AI, roll against the lower of
Computer Programming (AI) and the
relevant skill.
Modifiers: -2 or more for an unfa-
miliar programming language (see
Familiarity, p. 169). The time modi-
fiers under Time Spent (p. 346) will
often apply. When writing a program
that deals with a specialized field of
knowledge, the GM may require a roll
against the lower of Computer
Programming and your skill in that
field (e.g., a Mathematics specialty for
a complex mathematical program, or
the lower of Teaching skill and a “sub-
ject” skill for an expert system that will
assist users with a particular subject).
184 SKILLS




Connoisseur†
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5 and others.
This skill represents an educated
understanding of art and luxury items.
It is vital to art dealers, critics, master
thieves, and anyone who wishes to
appear cultured. A successful roll lets
you predict what critics will think of a
piece of art, assess how much it will
fetch on the market (+1 to Merchant
skill when trading it), or impress the
culturally literate (may give +1 to
Savoir-Faire or reaction rolls, at the
GM’s option).
You  must specialize. Specialties
include Dance, Literature, Music,
Visual Arts, and Wine. Each specialty
defaults to skills used to study or create
the art at -3: Connoisseur (Literature)
defaults to Literature, Poetry, or
Writing at -3; Connoisseur (Music)
defaults to Group Performance
(Conducting), Musical Composition,
or Musical Instrument at -3; and so
on.
Modifiers:  Cultural Familiarity
modifiers (p. 23); -3 for Killjoy (p. 140).
Cooking
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5 or Housekeeping-5.
This is the skill of being a chef –
you do not need it to heat water and
open boxes, or to cook rat-on-a-stick
over your campfire. A successful skill
roll allows you to prepare a pleasing
meal. Many chefs have an optional
specialty (p. 169), such as baking, bev-
erage making, or a particular variety
of ethnic cuisine (e.g., Chinese or
Martian).
Counterfeiting/TL
IQ/Hard
Defaults: IQ-6 or Forgery-2.
This is the art of duplicating bank-
notes and coins. It is only taught by
the underworld and government agen-
cies (although this is rare outside of
rogue states, except in wartime). Time
required varies from days to weeks
(GM’s option). The GM secretly rolls
against your Counterfeiting skill for
each “batch” of money.
A critical success means that the
fakes in that batch are as good as the
real thing.
An ordinary success means that
your work is good but not perfect.
Whenever you try to pass the counter-
feit money, the GM makes a second
skill roll for you, with all the same
modifiers. If this roll fails, the recipi-
ent spots your handiwork. To success-
fully pass bogus currency to someone
who has reason to be suspicious, you
must win a Quick Contest of
Counterfeiting vs. the highest of his
Perception, Forensics, and Merchant.
Any  failure on the initial Coun-
terfeiting roll means that the first per-
son to receive the money immediately
realizes that it is bogus. Critical failure
– on the initial roll or any subsequent
roll – has other ramifications: the
recipient is an undercover cop, an
armed and angry citizen, etc.
Modifiers:  Equipment modifiers
(p. 345). Materials – ink, paper, 
presses, etc. – stolen from the legiti-
mate mint can give from +1 (a few
rolls of paper) to +10 (actual plates or
molds). You must have a sample of the
real thing or you cannot make the
attempt at all!
Crewman/TL
IQ/Easy
Default: IQ-4.
This is the ability to serve as crew
aboard a specific type of large vehicle.
It includes familiarity with “shipboard
life,” knowledge of safety measures,
and training in damage control (the
use of emergency equipment to con-
trol flooding, fight fires, patch the
hull, and so forth). Make a skill roll for
basic map or chart reading, practical
meteorology, or to recall laws and reg-
ulations that pertain to your vehicle.
This skill also lets you steer the ves-
sel. It is easier than Piloting,
Submarine, and similar skills because
it  only  includes knowledge of how to
steer. Specialists handle such activities
as plotting courses and operating sen-
sors. These experts report to the cap-
tain, who in turn tells you how to
maneuver. Make a DX-based skill roll
whenever you take the helm – but note
that your effective skill cannot exceed
your captain’s Shiphandling skill
(p. 220).
The  average  Crewman skill of an
entire crew can be used as a measure
of overall crew quality. The GM rolls
against average skill whenever the
vehicle arrives or departs, in unfavor-
able conditions, or in battle. Failure
and critical failure results depend on
the circumstances.
There is a separate skill for each
class of vessel:
Airshipman/TL:  The skill of han-
dling ballast, gas valves, mooring
lines, etc. on a blimp, zeppelin, or
other large airship.
Seamanship/TL: The skill of operat-
ing anchors, hatches, mooring lines,
pumps, sails, windlasses, etc. aboard a
large surface ship (but not  a subma-
rine).
Spacer/TL:  The skill of working
with airlocks, docking clamps, hull
patches, pressure doors, etc. on a large
spacecraft or space base.
Submariner/TL:  The skill of han-
dling pressure doors, pumps, valves,
etc. aboard a submarine or in an
undersea base.
SKILLS 185
Connoisseur represents an educated 
understanding of art and luxury items. 
It is vital to art dealers, critics, master
thieves, and anyone who wishes to 
appear cultured.




Criminology/TL
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5 or Psychology-4.
This is the study of crime and the
criminal mind. A successful skill roll
allows you to find and interpret clues,
guess how criminals might behave,
etc. Though this skill does not actually
default to Streetwise, the GM might
allow a Streetwise roll instead in cer-
tain situations – especially to predict or
outguess a criminal.
Modifiers: -3 for Low Empathy
(p. 142).
Crossbow
DX/Easy
Default: DX-4.
This is the ability to use all types of
crossbows, including the pistol cross-
bow, prodd (which fires pellets or
stones), repeating crossbow, and high-
tech compound crossbow.
Cryptography/TL
IQ/Hard
Default: Mathematics (Cryptology)-
5.
This is the ability to create and
defeat encryption systems, codes, and
ciphers. It is of use in wartime, espi-
onage, and even business dealings. It
covers all the techniques of your TL,
which can range from unsophisticat-
ed substitution ciphers to state-of-the-
art tactical encryption schemes.
Knowledge of a specific system, code,
or cipher depends on your Security
Clearance (p. 82) and allegiances
(national, administrative, or both). In
many settings, some level of Security
Clearance is a prerequisite to learning
this skill at all.
Treat an attempt to break an
unknown code as a Quick Contest of
Cryptography skill between the code-
breaker and code-maker. The code-
breaker must win  to break the code.
Repeated attempts are possible, but
each attempt takes a day. The code-
maker rolls only once, when he first
creates the code.
Those with Cryptography skill may
take an optional  specialty (p. 169) in
making or breaking codes. (The code-
breaking specialty is often called
“cryptanalysis.”)
Cryptography normally has no  IQ
default, with two exceptions. Anyone
can devise a trivial code or cipher by
making an IQ-5 roll. This won’t stall a
professional for long, of course.
Likewise, anyone can make an IQ-5
roll to attempt to break such a trivial
code (but not a code devised by some-
one with Cryptography skill), using
the Quick Contest system described
above.
Modifiers:  Mathematical Ability
(p. 90). A computer with appropriate
software gives a bonus (provided you
know Computer Operation skill): +1
for a home computer, +2 for a mini-
computer, +3 or +4 for a mainframe,
and +5 or more for a supercomputer.
The  code-breaker  is at +5 if he has a
sample of the code with translation,
and -5 if the message to be decoded is
shorter than 25 words. The code-
maker receives a bonus for the time
taken to create the code: consult the
Size and Speed/Range Table (p. 550),
look up the time in days in the
Range/Speed column (substituting
“days” for “yards”), and use the corre-
sponding bonus.
Current Affairs/TL†
IQ/Easy
Defaults: IQ-4 or Research-4.
This is the ability to assimilate
quickly whatever qualifies as “news” in
your world, and to recall it as needed.
You  must  specialize in one of the
following areas:
Business: Exchange rates, invest-
ment performance, etc.
Headline News: Usually  bad  news,
such as assassinations, plagues, and
wars.
High Culture: Information on gal-
leries, operas, symphonies, and so
forth.
People: The names of and gossip on
celebrities, heads of state, and the like.
Politics:  Election results, interna-
tional treaties, etc.
Popular Culture: Hit songs, cool
fashions, and hot products, among
other things.
Regional: News of all kinds for a
specific region (pick one). This is the
definitive “town crier” skill at low TLs.
Science &amp; Technology: New discov-
eries and inventions.
Sports: Scores for recent matches,
names of star athletes, etc.
Travel: Where the “beautiful peo-
ple” are going this year, and how
much it all costs.
These specialties default to one
another at -4. It is hard to bone up on
one kind of news without learning
about all the others!
On a successful Current Affairs
roll, the GM will inform you of any
news within your specialty that per-
tains to the current adventure (possi-
bly including clues, on a good roll) or
give you a small skill bonus (e.g., a
success on Current Affairs (Sports)
might give +1 to Gambling skill when
betting on a boxing match).
186 SKILLS




Modifiers: -1 per day that you have
been unable to access news media; -3 if
you only have one source; +1 or more
for “inside” access to the news (a sub-
scription to an ordinary wire service is
worth +1, while a job at an intelligence
agency might give +3 or more).
Dancing
DX/Average
Default: DX-5.
This is the ability to perform
dances appropriate to your own cul-
ture, and to learn new dances quickly.
Note that certain physical handicaps
make this skill effectively impossible!
Exotic dances abound in fiction
and history: blade dancing, bull danc-
ing, fire dancing, snake dancing, etc.
The GM may decide that each is a sep-
arate DX/Average skill that defaults to
Dancing-5.
Modifiers:  Cultural Familiarity
modifiers (p. 23); -5 if the dance is
unfamiliar (a dance is familiar once
you have successfully performed it
three times).
Detect Lies
Per/Hard
Defaults: Perception-6, Body
Language-4, or Psychology-4.
This is the ability to tell when
someone is lying to you. It is not the
same as Interrogation (p. 202); Detect
Lies works in a casual or social situa-
tion. When you ask to use this skill,
the GM rolls a Quick Contest of your
Detect Lies skill vs. your subject’s IQ
(or Fast-Talk or Acting skill). If you
win, the GM tells you whether the sub-
ject is lying. If you lose, the GM may
lie to you about whether you were lied
to . . . or just say, “You can’t tell.”
Modifiers: +1 for Sensitive or +3 for
Empathy (p. 51), or -3 for Low
Empathy (p. 142); +4 if your subject is
Easy to Read (p. 134). If the subject is
of a different species, the GM may
assess a penalty – see Physiology
Modifiers (p. 181).
Diagnosis/TL
IQ/Hard
Defaults: IQ-6, First Aid-8,
Physician-4, or Veterinary-5.
This is the ability to tell what is
wrong with a sick or injured person,
or what killed a dead person. A suc-
cessful roll gives some information
about the patient’s problem – limited
to realistic knowledge for your tech
level. It might not determine the exact
problem (if the GM feels the cause is
totally beyond your experience, for
instance), but it always gives hints,
rule out impossibilities, etc. No
Diagnosis roll is required for obvious
things, like open wounds and missing
limbs!
Modifiers:  Equipment modifiers
(p. 345); physiology modifiers (p. 181);
-5 for internal injuries; -5 or more for
a rare disease.
Diplomacy
IQ/Hard
Defaults: IQ-6 or Politics-6.
This is the skill of negotiating,
compromising, and getting along with
others. You may substitute a
Diplomacy roll for any reaction roll in
a noncombat situation, as described
under Influence Rolls (p. 359).
Unlike other Influence skills,
Diplomacy never gives a worse result
than if you had tried an ordinary reac-
tion roll. Failure with Fast-Talk or Sex
Appeal alienates the subject, but
Diplomacy is usually safe.
A successful roll also allows you to
predict the possible outcome of a
course of action when you are negoti-
ating, or to choose the best approach
to take. 
If you know Diplomacy at level 20
or better, you get a +2 bonus on all
reaction rolls!
Modifiers:  +2 for Voice (p. 97); -3
for Low Empathy (p. 142); -1 for
Oblivious (p. 146); -1 to -4 for Shyness
(p. 154); -2 for Stuttering (p. 157).
Disguise/TL†
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5 or Makeup-3.
This is the art of altering your
appearance using clothing, makeup,
and prosthetics. You do not need this
skill to don a quick disguise – e.g., to
put on a lab coat when you enter a lab-
oratory – but such disguises only fool
the inattentive! A good  disguise
requires a Disguise roll and 30 
minutes to an hour of preparation.
Roll a Quick Contest of Disguise
skill vs. the Perception of each person
your disguise must fool. Individuals
with Criminology or Observation skill
may substitute those skills for
Perception when rolling to penetrate a
disguise. The GM may allow other
skills to be of use – for instance,
Physician skill might help spot a rub-
ber nose.
When combining Acting (p. 174)
with Disguise (that is, when you must
change your face and your personali-
ty), you need only make one roll for
each person or group – but it must be
the harder of the two rolls.
If there is more than one sapient
species in your world, you must  spe-
cialize by race – Disguise (Human) is
nothing like Disguise (Bug-Eyed
Monster). Disguise specialized in your
own species is the most common
form; just list this as “Disguise” on
your character sheet. Disguise skills
for physically similar species default
to one another at -2 to -4.
Modifiers:  Equipment modifiers
(p. 345). +4 for Elastic Skin (p. 51).
You are at -1 to -5 to disguise yourself
as someone very different from you
(GM’s discretion). Distinctive appear-
ance also gives a penalty – see Build
(p. 18),  Unnatural Features (p. 22), 
and specific disadvantages (e.g.,
Hunchback, p. 139) for details.
Differences in Size Modifier usually
make Disguise impossible.
You can also learn Disguise
(Animals) to deceive nonsapient crea-
tures. This involves wearing animal
skins, smearing your body with musk
or dung, etc. There is no default
between this and other Disguise spe-
cialties. Use the following modifiers
instead of those given above.
Modifiers:  +2 if approaching from
downwind; -1 for each animal over one
of the same type being approached (-1
for every 10 in the case of herd ani-
mals); -1 to -3 if the skins are old or in
poor condition. Make a Naturalist roll
to recall the habits of the animal being
imitated; success gives +1 to +3, while
failure gives -1 to -3.
Diving Suit/TL
see Environment Suit, p. 192
SKILLS 187




Dreaming
Will/Hard
Default: Will-6.
This is the skill of controlling and
remembering your dreams. A success-
ful skill roll lets you experience vivid
dreams about a subject of your choos-
ing. Use the Fortune-Telling (Dream
Interpretation) skill to interpret your
dreams. In some game worlds, this
might be a useful divinatory technique
(GM’s decision).
A Dreaming roll can also help you
recall a previously forgotten piece of
information, or something you wit-
nessed but did not consciously note.
This technique is much less reliable
than Eidetic Memory (p. 51), though.
The GM will describe your dreams to
you, working clues into the narrative.
It is up to you, the player, to spot these
hints!
Finally, you can use this skill to
combat malign supernatural influ-
ences on your dreams. Resolve this as
a Quick Contest between your
Dreaming skill and your harasser’s
skill at dream control. If you win, you
shut out the external influence.
Driving/TL†
DX/Average
Defaults: DX-5 or IQ-5.
This is the ability to drive a specif-
ic type of ground vehicle.
Make an IQ-based Driving roll for
basic map reading, to diagnose simple
malfunctions, or to recall rules of the
road.
You must specialize:
Automobile: Any vehicle with three
or more wheels that weighs less than 5
tons and does not move on rails.
Defaults: Heavy Wheeled-2 or other
Driving at -4.
Construction Equipment: Any kind
of bulldozer, crane, plow, etc. Default:
other Driving at -5.
Halftrack: Any vehicle that moves
on tracks and  either wheels or skids.
Defaults: Tracked-2 or other Driving at
-4.
Heavy Wheeled: Any vehicle with
three or more wheels that weighs 5
tons or more and does not move on
rails.  Defaults: Automobile-2 or other
Driving at -4.
Hovercraft: Any kind of air-cushion
vehicle. Default: other Driving at -5.
Locomotive: Any vehicle that
moves on conventional or maglev
rails. Default: other Driving at -5.
Mecha: Any kind of legged, bounc-
ing, rolling, or slithering vehicle.
Defaults: Battlesuit-3 or other Driving
at -5.
Motorcycle:  Any powered one- or
two-wheeled vehicle, including those
with sidecars. Large motorcycles often
have a Minimum ST, just like a
weapon (see p. 270). Default:
Bicycling-4.
Tracked: Any vehicle that moves on
tracks.  Defaults: Halftrack-2 or other
Driving at -4.
Note that the ability to “drive” a
team of animals is not Driving, but
Teamster (p. 225).
Modifiers: -2 or more for bad driv-
ing conditions; -2 or more for a vehicle
in bad repair; -2 for an unfamiliar con-
trol system (e.g., an automatic when
you are used to a manual); -4 or more
for a vehicle of an unfamiliar type
within your specialty (e.g., a race car
when you are used to stock cars).
188 SKILLS




Dropping
DX/Average
Defaults: DX-3 or Throwing-4.
This is the skill of dropping heavy
objects on your foes while flying. Treat
this as a ranged attack made from
above. Learn Dropping if you wish to
drop boulders and similar projectiles
on individual opponents while on the
wing. Use Artillery (Bombs) to attack
areas with explosive ordnance, etc.
Economics
IQ/Hard
Defaults: IQ-6, Finance-3, Market
Analysis-5, or Merchant-6.
This is the study of the theory  of
money, markets, and financial sys-
tems. It is mainly an academic skill,
but a successful skill roll allows you to
predict the economic impact of events
in the game world: the assassination
of a political figure, the demolition of
a power plant, the introduction of a
new invention, etc. Adventurers with
intelligence and military backgrounds
frequently have some training in this
skill.
Electrician/TL
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5 or Engineer
(Electrical)-3.
This is the skill of building, main-
taining, and repairing electrical sys-
tems. Make a skill roll to diagnose an
electrical fault, wire a building or vehi-
cle, etc. Adventuring uses include
damage control in combat (e.g., to
restore power to a damaged vehicle
system) and cutting the power to a
building prior to clandestine activities.
Note that electrical and  electronic
systems are not the same thing. The
equivalent skill for electronics is
Electronics Repair (p. 190).
Modifiers:  Equipment modifiers
(p. 345).
Electronics
Operation/TL†
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5, Electronics Repair
(same)-5, or Engineer (Electronics)-5.
This skill lets you use all electronic
equipment within a known specialty.
Make a skill roll in an emergency situ-
ation or for “abnormal” use of equip-
ment – not for ordinary, everyday use.
(Exception: Unskilled users must
always attempt their default roll!)
You must specialize. Available spe-
cialties vary by game world, but might
include:
Communications (Comm): All
forms of electronic communications
technology: radios, satellite uplinks,
laser communicators, etc. Includes
knowledge of any standard, current
communications codes appropriate to
your background. These do not
require a skill roll – although attempts
to understand or use an unfamiliar
code do  require a roll. At TL5-7, this
includes telegraphy: you can send or
receive 2 words per minute (wpm) per
point of skill at TL5, 3 wpm per point
of skill at TL6-7.
Electronic Warfare (EW): All sig-
nals-intelligence and jamming equip-
ment, including electronic counter-
measures (ECM) and electronic
counter-countermeasures (ECCM). In
most game worlds, only intelligence
agencies and the military teach this
specialty – and only to individuals
with suitable Military Rank (p. 30) or
Security Clearance (p. 82).
Force Shields: Portable, vehicular,
base, and starship force shields and
deflectors.
Matter Transmitters (MT): All mat-
ter transmitters and teleporters.
Critical failures can be disastrous,
especially when transmitting living
beings!
Media: All forms of audio, film, and
video editing equipment. If three-
dimensional video (“holographics”) or
sensory recordings (“sensies”) exist in
the setting, this specialty includes the
ability to operate the relevant equip-
ment. Treat different media as mutu-
ally unfamiliar technologies.
Medical: All manner of electronic
diagnostic and life-support equip-
ment.
Parachronic:  Technological means
of travel between dimensions or time-
lines.
Psychotronics: Psionic technology,
such as telepathic shields and ampli-
fiers.
Scientific:  Laboratory electronics
and survey gear. You are automatically
familiar with the equipment used with
any scientific skill on which you have
spent at least one point.
Security: Both operating and cir-
cumventing all forms of alarms, secu-
rity sensors, and area-surveillance
technology.
Sensors: Most forms of long-range
detection gear, from air-defense radar
to starship sensor suites. Certain high-
ly specialized sensors (such as sonar,
below) have their own specialties.
Sonar:  All types of acoustic detec-
tion and ranging gear (normally used
underwater).
Surveillance: All forms of conceal-
able or remote surveillance gear:
“bugs,” hidden cameras, long-range
microphones, wiretaps, etc.
Temporal:  All manner of time
machines. Critical failures can be dis-
astrous for the time travelers! Make
separate rolls to “lock onto” and trans-
fer the travelers.
These specialties default to one
another at -4; however, the GM is free
to rule that in his campaign, there is no
default between exotic specialties
(Parachronic, Psychotronics, etc.) and
mundane ones (Media, Security, etc.).
The technologies covered by a particu-
lar specialty vary with TL. For instance,
Electronics Operation (Comm) covers
telegraphs at TL5, telephones and
radios at TL6, and digital communica-
tions systems at TL8 . . . and might
cover faster-than-light or telepathic
communicators at higher TLs.
Familiarity (p. 169) is crucial here!
Electronics Operation/TL8 (Sensors)
covers both thermographs on fighter
jets and ground-penetrating radars on
satellites, but going from one to the
other gives you -2 for type (thermo-
graph to radar) and -2 for implemen-
tation (jet to satellite), for a net -4 to
skill until you familiarize yourself
with all the differences.
Modifiers:  Equipment modifiers
(p. 345); -2 for an unfamiliar technol-
ogy of a known type (e.g., radar when
you are used to thermograph) or an
unfamiliar implementation of a famil-
iar technology (e.g., air-defense radar
when you are used to weather radar);
-1 to -10 if you have been away from
the field for a long time (this varies by
field) and have not had a chance to
become familiar with the changes.
SKILLS 189




Electronics Repair/TL†
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5, Electronics
Operation (same)-3, or Engineer
(Electronics)-3.
This is the ability to diagnose and
repair known types of electronic
equipment. Time required for each
attempt is up to the GM. You must
specialize in one of the areas listed
under Electronics Operation (above),
or in Computers (Electronics Repair
(Computers) defaults to Computer
Operation-5). These specialties default
to one another at -4.
Modifiers:  Equipment modifiers
(p. 345); -2 without plans or schemat-
ics; -2 for an unfamiliar technology or
implementation (just as for
Electronics Operation); -4 to modify a
device away from its intended 
purpose.
Engineer/TL†
IQ/Hard
Defaults: Special.
Prerequisites: Mathematics
(Applied) at TL5+, plus others as
noted.
This is the ability to design and
build technological devices and sys-
tems. A successful roll lets you design
a new system, diagnose a glitch, iden-
tify the purpose of a strange device, or
improvise a gadget to solve a problem.
Time required for each attempt is up
to the GM.
Note that engineers are designers
and inventors; they are not necessarily
skilled at the routine operation or
maintenance of the things they
design! For instance, Engineer (Small
Arms) lets you design a new assault
rifle, but you need Armoury skill to
maintain it and Guns skill to shoot it.
You must specialize. Possible fields
include:
Artillery: Designing whatever pass-
es for artillery at your TL, from tre-
buchets to smart missiles. Default:
Armoury (Heavy Weapons)-6.
Civil: Planning highways, aque-
ducts, buildings, etc. Default:
Architecture-6.
Clockwork: Designing wind-up
gadgetry – watches, mechanical men,
and the like. Default: Mechanic
(Clockwork)-6.
Combat: Building or removing for-
tifications, trenches, etc. Default:
Explosives (Demolition)-6.
Electrical: Designing electrical sys-
tems, such as power cells and trans-
mission lines. Default: Electrician-6.
Electronics: Designing and building
electronic apparatus, from computers
to starship sensor arrays. (The specific
technologies involved – vacuum tubes,
transistors, photonics, etc. – will
depend on the tech level.) Default:
Electronics Repair (any)-6.
Materials: Concocting new struc-
tural materials. Prerequisites:
Chemistry or Metallurgy. Defaults:
Chemistry-6 or Metallurgy-6.
Microtechnology: Designing micro-
machines.  Default: Mechanic
(Micromachines)-6.
Mining: Designing underground
structures.  Defaults: Explosives
(Demolition)-6 or Geology (any)-6.
Nanotechnology: Designing
nanomachines.  Default: Mechanic
(Nanomachines)-6.
Parachronic:  Designing apparatus
for crossing dimensions or timelines.
Prerequisite: Physics.  Default:
Electronics Operation (Parachronic)-
6, but there is no default if your socie-
ty has not discovered dimensional
travel.
Psychotronics:  Designing psionic
technology, such as telepathic shields
and amplifiers. Default: Electronics
Operation (Psychotronics)-6, but
there is no default for individuals from
backgrounds where psionics do not
exist.
Robotics:  Designing robotics and
cybernetics.  Default: Mechanic
(Robotics)-6.
Small Arms: Designing personal
firearms, such as guns and portable
rocket launchers. Default:
Armoury
(Small Arms)-6.
Temporal:  Designing time
machines. Prerequisite: Physics.
Default: Electronics Operation
190 SKILLS
Skills for Design, Repair, and Use
When choosing technological skills for your character, it can be
helpful to bear in mind that such skills govern three distinct classes of
activity:
Design. An inventor, gadgeteer, or mad scientist requires skills that
let him design and build new inventions, redesign existing ones, and
deduce the function of (and reverse-engineer!) unknown technologies.
The key skill here is Engineer – specialized in the inventor’s fields of
interest – but Bioengineering (for biotechnology) and Computer
Programming (for software) are equally appropriate.
Repair. A craftsman or technician needs skills that enable him to
troubleshoot and repair known devices, perform major overhauls and
upgrades, install new equipment, and customize existing gear. The
most important skills of this type are Armoury, Electrician, Electronics
Repair, Machinist, and Mechanic.
Use. A detective, soldier, spy, or similar professional needs skills that
let him operate specialized equipment, conduct routine maintenance
on his gear, and identify common makes and models (and their
strengths and weaknesses). Such skills include Computer Operation,
Electronics Operation, Environment Suit, Explosives, vehicle skills
(Crewman, Driving, Shiphandling, etc.), and weapon skills (Artillery,
Guns, etc.).
These skills form “design-repair-use triads”; e.g., Engineer
(Electronics)-Electronics Repair-Electronics Operation for electronic
devices, Engineer (Vehicle)-Mechanic-Driving for vehicles, and
Engineer (Small Arms)-Armoury-Guns for firearms. Cinematic adven-
turers with great depth of knowledge often have all three skills in a triad!




(Temporal)-6, but there is no  default
for individuals from backgrounds
without time travel!
Vehicle Type: Designing a single,
broad class of vehicle. Examples
include Engineer (Automobiles),
Engineer (Ships), and Engineer
(Starships).  Default: Mechanic (same
vehicle type)-6.
Engineer specialties normally
default to one another at -4; however,
the GM is free to rule that in his cam-
paign, there is no default between
exotic specialties (Nanotechnology,
Parachronic, Psychotronics, etc.) and
more mundane ones (Civil, Combat,
Mining, etc.).
Modifiers:  Equipment modifiers
(p. 345). Up to +5 to build a gadget if
you can give the GM a good descrip-
tion of what you want it to do.
Enthrallment
Will/Hard
Defaults: None.
Prerequisites: Charisma 1 and
Public Speaking at 12+.
Bards in fantasy can often influ-
ence others through storytelling. The
GM may choose to represent this abil-
ity using the four Enthrallment skills
described below. Depending on the
setting, these skills might be magical,
psionic, or a cinematic form of hypno-
tism. Each has a time requirement, FP
cost, and duration, and requires two
skill rolls to use.
At the outset of the tale, roll vs.
Public Speaking skill; if you can’t grab
your audience’s attention early on, you
won’t have much of a chance of con-
trolling them by the end. On a success,
proceed to the Enthrallment skill roll;
critical success gives +1 on that roll. On
a failure, you may still attempt the
Enthrallment roll, but at a penalty
equal to your margin of failure. Critical
failure means your Enthrallment
attempt fails automatically.
After the time required to enthrall
has passed, roll a Quick Contest of
your Enthrallment skill vs. the Will of
each audience member. If you win,
you affect your audience – see the
individual skill description for effects.
If you lose or tie, there is no effect.
However, if you critically  fail, your
audience instantly turns hostile!
You may never learn these skills at
a skill level higher than your Public
Speaking skill.
Audience Size: An “audience” can
be one listener or a hundred – as many
as can hear the tale. However, the
number of audience members that
you can enthrall at one sitting is limit-
ed to your Charisma level squared, to a
maximum of 25 people at Charisma 5.
Modifiers:  All four Enthrallment
skills are at -3 for Low Empathy
(p. 142). If the player actually tells a
good tale, the GM should reward him
with +1 to +3 to the Public Speaking
and Enthrallment rolls!
Captivate
Will/Hard
Defaults: None.
Prerequisite: Suggest at 12+.
This skill allows you to tell a story
so skillfully that those listening lose
their will and do whatever you want
them to do. In effect, they believe
themselves to be in  the tale, and are
vulnerable to being manipulated by
you, the teller of the tale.
If you win the Quick Contest, the
audience becomes intensely loyal to
you. They follow any direct order you
give. In the absence of a direct order,
they act in your best interest, as they
understand it. If you tell someone to
do something very hazardous, or that
goes against his usual code of behav-
ior (GM’s decision), he gets a Will-5
roll to break the captivation.
Otherwise, he is your loyal supporter
for all intents and purposes.
Time: 30 minutes of uninterrupted
storytelling.
Fatigue Cost: 8 FP, whether suc-
cessful or not.
Duration: Captivation lasts until the
subject becomes unconscious or falls
asleep, you become unconscious or fall
asleep, you attack the subject, or the
subject loses half his HP to injury.
Persuade
Will/Hard
Defaults: None.
This ability allows you to bring an
audience over to your point of view,
granting you a bonus to your reaction
rolls with them. You may use this skill
whenever a reaction roll is called for.
If you win the Quick Contest, add
your margin of victory to any reaction
roll those in the audience make
regarding you – for any reason – to a
maximum of +3 (+4 on a critical suc-
cess). If you critically fail, the best pos-
sible reaction is Poor (see p. 560).
Time: 1 minute.
Fatigue Cost: 2 FP, whether suc-
cessful or not.
Duration:  Until you do something
to change the audience’s opinion!
Suggest
Will/Hard
Defaults: None.
Prerequisite: Persuade at 12+.
This ability lets you give your audi-
ence a single, simple suggestion. A
suggestion should have no complex
grammatical clauses – just a subject,
verb, object, and at most two modi-
fiers. “Kill the king!” is acceptable;
“Kill the king if he doesn’t accede to
our demands!” is not. A given subject
gets +5 to resist if your suggestion
goes against his personal safety, and
+3 if it goes against his beliefs, convic-
tions, or knowledge.
If you win the Quick Contest, the
audience members try to act on the
suggestion to the best of their abilities
– each assuming that the idea was his
own.
Time: 20 minutes of uninterrupted
storytelling.
Fatigue Cost: 6 FP, whether suc-
cessful or not.
Duration: 10 minutes – or longer, if
you continue to talk to the audience
and can make a successful Suggest roll
every 10 minutes! Once the suggestion
lapses, audience members only won-
der why they acted the way they did if
the suggestion was something they
would never have done normally.
SKILLS 191
“Kill the king!” is acceptable; “Kill the king if
he doesn’t accede to our demands!” is not.




Sway Emotions
Will/Hard
Defaults: None.
Prerequisite: Persuade at 12+.
This ability allows you to instill the
audience with any one emotion.
Allowed emotions include anger, bore-
dom, depression, disgust, fear, greed,
hate, jealousy, joy, love, lust, patriot-
ism, peace, sadness, and unrest.
If you win the Quick Contest, your
audience experiences the emotion you
select. How they act as a result is up to
the GM.
Time: 10 minutes of uninterrupted
storytelling.
Fatigue Cost: 4 FP, whether suc-
cessful or not.
Duration: One hour.
Environment Suit/TL
DX/Average
Defaults: DX-5 and others.
This is training in the use of a spe-
cific class of protective suit. Suits
designed to shield the wearer from
environmental or battlefield hazards
frequently incorporate gadgets (such
as autoinjectors and sensors) and life-
support equipment. Some suits even
contain motors to enhance ST or
Move. As a result, you do not merely
wear such gear – you operate it.
Roll against Environment Suit skill
to get into or out of your suit quickly.
A successful roll halves the time
required. To activate a specific subsys-
tem of a suit, or to gauge whether a
suit is in good repair, make an IQ-
based skill roll instead.
When rolling against DX or any
DX-based skill while suited up, use the
lower  of your Environment Suit skill
and your actual skill level. For
instance, if you have DX 14, Stealth-
15, and Vacc Suit-13, you will function
at DX 13 and Stealth-13 while wearing
a spacesuit. Particularly ungainly suits
might give -1 or more to DX on top of
this, regardless of skill level. On the
other hand, some sleek, ultra-tech
suits might not limit skills at all!
However, Environment Suit is
strictly the skill of donning and operat-
ing the suit. Familiarity with and
knowledge of dangerous environments
is covered by other skills: Free Fall,
Hazardous Materials, Survival, etc.
Each suit type requires its own
skill. Examples include:
Battlesuit/TL: All kinds of powered
battle armor and exoskeletons. Battle
armor and exoskeletons are similar
but not identical. If you only have
experience with one, you are at -2 to
operate the other until you gain 
familiarity (see Familiarity, p. 169).
Diving Suit/TL: All types of hard
diving suits (as opposed to the wet-
suits and drysuits used with Scuba
skill). This includes “open dress” gear
at TL5 and “hard hat” gear at TL6,
both of which use a sealed helmet and
supplied air, but not always a full,
sealed suit. At TL7+, this skill covers
true underwater “hardsuits.” The GM
may require Swimming rolls to
maneuver  while wearing such a suit.
Default: Scuba-2.
NBC Suit/TL: All forms of haz-
ardous materials (“HazMat”) gear –
including sealed, unpowered body
armor that can be buttoned down
against nuclear-biological-chemical
(NBC) threats. Without this skill, you
run the risk of misusing the equipment
and being exposed to contamination.
To  improvise  NBC gear, make an IQ-
based skill roll at -5 to -15 to skill.
Vacc Suit/TL: Any kind of spacesuit.
In addition to true vacuum suits, this
includes suits intended for use in high-
pressure, corrosive, and poisonous
atmospheres.
Battlesuit, NBC Suit, and Vacc Suit
default among themselves at -2.
Diving Suit defaults to or from any
other Environment Suit skill at -4.
Note that unpowered, unsealed
body armor never requires an
Environment Suit skill.
Erotic Art
DX/Average
Defaults: DX-5 or Acrobatics-5.
This represents general knowledge
of advanced sexual technique. IQ-,
HT-, and even ST-based rolls are com-
mon. Precise game effects are left to
the GM’s discretion.
Modifiers:  +3 for Flexibility or  +5
for Double-Jointed (p. 56); -3 for
Killjoy (p. 140).
Escape
DX/Hard
Default: DX-6.
This is the ability to slip out of
ropes, handcuffs, and similar
restraints. The first attempt to escape
takes one minute; each subsequent
attempt takes 10 minutes.
The GM may apply a penalty for
particularly secure bonds. For
instance, modern police handcuffs
would give -5 to Escape. You suffer
only half  these penalties if you dislo-
cate the restrained limb (usually an
arm). This requires (20 - skill) minutes
of concentration, minimum one
minute and a Will roll. However, if you
fail your Escape roll by 3 or more
when dislocating a limb, the limb suf-
fers 1d damage. On a critical failure,
you automatically take enough 
damage to cripple the limb!
Modifiers:  +3 for Flexibility or  +5
for Double-Jointed (p. 56); any bonus
for Slippery (p. 85).
Esoteric Medicine
Per/Hard
Default: Perception-6.
This is the skill of treating illness
and injury with techniques grounded
in esoteric theory rather than analyti-
cal science. It is usually associated
with a magical or spiritual tradition.
The particulars vary by tradition, but
might include acupuncture, massage,
alchemical or herbal preparations, or
such exercises as breath control and
meditation.
The effectiveness of Esoteric
Medicine relative to Physician (p. 213)
is up to the GM. It might be more
effective (especially if it can channel
real supernatural power), equivalent
but different, or less effective. It
should always be at least as good as
First Aid (p. 195) – the attentions of a
trained healer of any kind are prefer-
able to bleeding to death! In TL5+ set-
tings, Esoteric Medicine is often per-
ceived as “quack” medicine, regardless
of actual effectiveness.
This skill might represent Ayurvedic
medicine,  chi  treatment, Hermetic
medicine, yin/yang healing, or any
other historical or fictional healing dis-
cipline. In settings where multiple
forms of treatment exist, healers must
specialize in one specific tradition.
192 SKILLS




Exorcism
Will/Hard
Defaults: Will-6, Religious Ritual
(any)-3, Ritual Magic (any)-3, or
Theology (any)-3.
This is the ability to drive a spirit
from a possessed person or haunted
location. It is not a magical skill, but a
religious ritual. Exorcism is not specif-
ic to any one religion. A Malay witch
doctor and a Catholic priest can both
perform exorcisms; their relative effec-
tiveness depends on the originating
culture of the spirit.
The length of the ritual is 15 min-
utes ¥ the spirit’s HT. Some spirits wait
patiently through the ritual, anticipat-
ing the combat to come; others try to
distract or even attack you before you
can complete the ritual. Once the ritu-
al is complete, roll against Exorcism
skill.
On a failure, the spirit remains and
you must wait at least a week before
you can repeat the ritual. On a critical
failure, immediately roll 3d+10 on the
Fright Check Table (p. 360). Even if you
keep your sanity, you may never
attempt to exorcise this particular
spirit again.
On a critical success, you immedi-
ately banish the spirit. On a regular
success, you meet your opponent in a
Quick Contest: your Exorcism skill vs.
the  higher  of the spirit’s ST or Will.
When fighting a spirit in a living host,
add higher of the ST or Will of the pos-
session victim to your Exorcism skill
as he tries to “push the spirit out.”
If the spirit wins or ties, it retains
its current status and you must wait at
least a week before you can repeat the
ritual. If you win, you drive the spirit
from its haunt or victim. The spirit of
a deceased mortal is laid to rest. For
demons and similar entities, make a
reaction roll. On a “Poor” or better
reaction, the spirit flees in humilia-
tion. On a “Bad” or worse reaction, the
spirit immediately uses whatever
resources it has to take vengeance on
you and those nearby.
If the exorcism fails at any stage,
make an IQ roll afterward. A success
means that you learned something
about the spirit that will help you in
your next  attempt to banish that foe,
giving you +2 on later skill rolls. You
may only claim this bonus once for a
particular spirit.
Modifiers: -4 if you do not have one
or more of Blessed (p. 40), Power
Investiture (p. 77), or True Faith
(p. 94); you might understand the rit-
ual, but you lack holy support.
Expert Skill†
IQ/Hard
Defaults: None.
An Expert Skill represents cross-
disciplinary knowledge of a single,
narrow theme. When answering fac-
tual questions on that theme, you may
substitute a roll against your Expert
Skill for any IQ-based roll against any
skill that has a default. Expert Skills
do not exempt you from Cultural
Familiarity (p. 23) or Language
(p. 23) requirements, and never pro-
vide the ability to do practical tasks.
Experts sometimes complement
Expert Skills with related Area
Knowledge skills (p. 176), but you
must learn these separately.
You must specialize by theme, and
the GM is free to forbid any theme he
feels is too broad. Some examples:
Computer Security: Expertise at
combating computer intrusion
(“hacking”). Can stand in for
Computer Operation, Cryptography,
or Electronics Operation to spot
“holes” in the security of a computer
system. Use Computer Programming
to patch or exploit such holes.
Conspiracy Theory: The study of
interlocking networks of conspiracies.
Can substitute for Anthropology,
Geography, History, Literature, or
Occultism to answer questions about
conspiracies, and can also work as
Intelligence Analysis for this purpose
(only). This does not  include hidden
inner secrets, which are the province
of Hidden Lore (p. 199).
SKILLS 193




Egyptology:  The study of ancient
Egypt. Can function as Anthropology,
Archaeology, History, Linguistics, or
Occultism for that purpose.
Epidemiology:  The study of the
spread of disease. Can serve as
Biology, Diagnosis, Forensics,
Geography, or Mathematics when
deducing how a disease was spread.
Hydrology: The study of a planet’s
water. Can be used in place of Biology,
Chemistry, Geography, Geology, or
Meteorology to answer questions
about precipitation, flooding, 
irrigation, etc.
Military Science: General expertise
on military capabilities. Can substi-
tute for Artillery, Armoury, Strategy, or
Tactics to answer questions about –
but not use – weapons or strategies.
Natural Philosophy: A general skill
that usually replaces specific science
skills (which might not even exist yet!)
for scholars at TL1-4. Can be used in
place of any science skill (e.g., Biology
or Physics) to answer questions about
how the universe is believed to work.
Political Science: The academic
study of politics. Can substitute for
Geography, History, Law, Politics, or
Sociology when performing political
analysis.
Psionics:  The study of the psionic
mind and brain. Can function as
Biology, Diagnosis, Physician,
Physiology, or Psychology when deal-
ing with psi phenomena in living
beings.  Cannot substitute for
Electronics Operation, Electronics
Repair, and Engineer specialties that
deal with psychotronics.
Thanatology: The esoteric study of
death. Can stand in for Anthropology,
Archaeology, Occultism, or Theology
when dealing with death and the dead.
Xenology:  General knowledge of
the known  races in your setting. Can
substitute for Anthropology, History,
Physiology, or Psychology to identify a
member of a race different from your
own, or to answer general questions
about the race and its culture.
Explosives/TL†
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5 and others.
This is the skill of working with
explosives and incendiaries.
You must specialize:
Demolition: The ability to prepare
and set explosives in order to blow
things up. Make a roll whenever you
use explosives in this way. A failure
indicates an error. The gravity of the
error depends on the amount by
which you failed; a badly failed roll in
close quarters can blow you up! Time
required varies – it takes only a cou-
ple of seconds to set a prepared
charge, but it might take hours to
demolish a large bridge or a sky-
scraper. When setting an explosive
trap, use this skill rather than Traps.
Rolls to set a “trap” fuse (e.g., a land
mine) instead of a timed fuse are at
-2.  Defaults: Engineer (Combat) or
(Mining) at -3.
Explosive Ordnance Disposal
(EOD): The ability to disarm and dis-
pose of bombs and other explosives.
When disarming a trap, roll a Quick
Contest of your Explosives (EOD)
skill vs. the Explosives (Demolition)
skill of the person who created the
device. A failure (or even a critical
failure) does not necessarily mean an
explosion – the GM can be much
more creative than that! Sudden hiss-
ing noises, mysterious parts falling
off, cramps, itches, and alarm bells
are all possible in the right circum-
stances. It is best if the GM rolls the
dice and describes the physical cir-
cumstances to the victim. Fright
Checks are appropriate for the sur-
vivors of a failed EOD attempt!
Prerequisite: DX 12+.
Fireworks: The skill of making
pyrotechnic devices – fireworks,
flares, smoke bombs, flash grenades,
etc. Most of these things can be used
by anyone. Default: Chemistry-3.
Nuclear Ordnance Disposal
(NOD): The equivalent of Explosives
(EOD) for nuclear devices. Disarming
a military nuclear weapon is straight-
forward; disarming a homemade ter-
rorist bomb might be more difficult.
Only a critical failure verified by a sec-
ond critical failure will result in a
nuclear detonation. Any lesser failure
will – at worst – detonate the high-
explosive trigger and contaminate the
immediate area with radioactive
material . . . not that this is a great
deal of consolation to those nearby.
Underwater Demolition (UD): The
ability to prepare and set explosives
underwater. This is otherwise 
identical to Explosives (Demolition).
You usually need Scuba skill – or at
least Swimming skill – to get into a
position where you can use this skill.
These specialties default to one
another at -4 except for Demolition
and UD, which default to one another
at -2, and EOD and NOD, which also
default to one another at -2.
Modifiers:  Equipment modifiers
(p. 345); -1 to -5 for distractions (e.g.,
enemy fire or swarms of biting ants)
or physical motion (e.g., a rocking
boat or speeding bus). The time mod-
ifiers under Time Spent (p. 346) will
often apply.
Falconry
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5 or Animal Handling
(Raptors)-3.
This is the skill of “hawking”: hunt-
ing small game with a trained hawk. It
includes knowledge of hunting and
training techniques, as well as how to
care for a falcon. Finding a wild fal-
con’s nest in spring requires a week’s
search and a successful Falconry roll;
a nest has 1d-3 chicks.
Farming/TL
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5, Biology-5, or
Gardening-3.
This is the skill of growing things.
It is usually used to earn a living, but
you can also use it to answer theoreti-
cal questions about or solve problems
related to agriculture.
Fast-Draw†
DX/Easy
Defaults: None.
This skill lets you quickly  draw a
weapon from its holster, sheath, or
hiding place. A successful roll means
you ready the weapon instantly. This
does not count as a combat maneuver;
you can use the weapon to attack on
the same turn. On a failure, you ready
your weapon normally but may do
nothing else on your turn. A critical
failure means you drop the weapon!
You must specialize in one of these
weapon types: Force Sword, Knife,
Long Arm (rifle, shotgun, submachine
gun, etc.), Pistol, Sword (any one-
handed blade larger than a knife), or
194 SKILLS




Two-Handed Sword. The GM may add
Fast-Draw skills for other weapons (or
even tools) that one could reasonably
draw quickly.
In addition to the above specialties,
there are two Fast-Draw skills that
allow you to reload missile weapons
quickly:
Fast-Draw (Arrow): Lets you ready
a single arrow, bolt, or dart instantly.
This reduces the time required to
reload a bow, crossbow, or blowgun by
one second.
Fast-Draw/TL (Ammo): Reduces
the time required to reload any kind of
gun or beam weapon. The exact bene-
fits depend on your weapon, but a suc-
cessful roll always shaves at least one
second off the reload time. This skill
varies greatly with TL! At TL4, it cov-
ers powder-and-shot drills; at TL6+, it
includes speed-loading techniques for
detachable magazines; and at higher
tech levels, it involves quickly replac-
ing energy cells and attaching power
cables.
For the Arrow and Ammo special-
ties, failure means you drop the arrow
or bolt, or accidentally discard one
round of ammunition. On a critical
failure, you drop the entire quiver,
powder horn, ammo box, magazine,
etc., scattering loose ammunition
everywhere!
Modifiers: Combat Reflexes (p. 43)
gives +1 to all Fast-Draw specialties;
Ham-Fisted (p. 138) gives -3 per level.
Fast-Talk
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5 or Acting-5.
This is the skill of talking others
into doing things against their better
judgment. It is not taught (intentional-
ly, that is) in school; you study it by
working as a salesman, confidence
man, lawyer, etc. In any situation that
calls for a reaction roll, you may make
an Influence roll against Fast-Talk
instead; see Influence Rolls (p. 359).
If you have Fast-Talk at level 20 or
better, you get +2 on all reaction rolls
where you’re allowed to talk!
Note that Fast-Talk differs from
Acting (p. 174). In general, Fast-Talk is
used to get someone to make a snap
decision in your favor, while Acting is
used for long-term dissimulation.
However, there are situations in which
the GM could allow a roll on either
skill.
Modifiers:  +2 for Voice (p. 97); -3
for Low Empathy (p. 142); -1 for
Oblivious (p. 146); -1 to -4 for Shyness
(p. 154); -2 for Stuttering (p. 157); -5
for Truthfulness (p. 159). The GM may
ask you for details of the story you are
using, rather than just let you say, “I’m
using Fast-Talk.” Your approach and
the plausibility of the story may fur-
ther modify the roll, at the GM’s dis-
cretion.
Filch
DX/Average
Defaults: DX-5, Pickpocket-4, or
Sleight of Hand-4.
This skill lets you steal objects that
are sitting in plain sight . . . without
being spotted. Roll against skill to
shoplift, snatch documents off a desk,
etc. If someone is actively watching
the item you wish to snatch, you must
win a Quick Contest of Filch vs. his
Vision roll (or Observation skill,
p. 211) to perform the theft unnoticed.
Filch only covers the theft itself.
The GM might require rolls against
Stealth to get close enough to make
the attempt and Holdout to conceal
stolen objects afterward.
Modifiers: +3 if the light is dim; +3
if you have a confederate to distract
attention.
Finance
IQ/Hard
Defaults: Accounting-4,
Economics-3, or Merchant-6.
This is the skill of managing
money. It is a practical application 
of Economics (p. 189), much as
Engineer skill is a practical applica-
tion of Physics. A successful skill roll
lets you broker a financial deal, raise
capital for a new corporation, balance
a budget, etc.
Modifiers:  Business Acumen and
Mathematical Ability both  provide a
bonus.
Fire Eating
DX/Average
Defaults: None.
This is the performance skill of
extinguishing flames in your mouth
without burning yourself. Make a skill
roll for each item you wish to extin-
guish. On a success, you put out the
flames. On a failure, you take 1d-3
damage (minimum 1) to your mouth.
This skill also includes fire breath-
ing: igniting a stream of fuel blown
from the mouth. At the GM’s option,
you may use this as an attack (1d-3
damage).
First Aid/TL
IQ/Easy
Defaults: IQ-4, Esoteric Medicine,
Physician, or Veterinary-4.
This is the ability to patch up an
injury in the field (see Recovery,
p. 423). Make a skill roll to halt bleed-
ing, suck out poison, give artificial res-
piration to a drowning victim, etc.
Unusual problems must be identified
using Diagnosis skill first.
Modifiers:  Equipment modifiers
(p. 345); physiology modifiers (p. 181).
Fishing
Per/Easy
Default: Perception-4.
This is the ability to catch fish –
with a net, hook and line, or whatever
method is used in your culture. If you
have proper equipment and there are
fish to be caught, a successful roll
catches them. If you lack equipment,
you can improvise.
Modifiers:  Equipment modifiers
(p. 345).
Flail
see Melee Weapon, p. 208
Flight
HT/Average
Default: HT-5.
Prerequisite: Flight advantage
(p. 56).
This skill represents training for
endurance flying. Use the better of
Flight or HT when rolling to avoid
fatigue due to flying. When traveling
long distances, a successful Flight roll
increases the distance traveled by
20%. If a group of fliers is traveling
together, all must make the Flight roll
in order to get the increased distance.
SKILLS 195




Flying Leap
IQ/Hard
Defaults: None.
Prerequisites: Trained By A Master
or Weapon Master, and both Jumping
and Power Blow.
This skill allows you to make
incredible leaps. It costs 1 FP per
attempt, successful or not.
On a success, you may immediate-
ly attempt a jump. Use the standard
jumping rules (see Jumping, p. 352),
but triple your jumping distance. On a
failure, you may still attempt the
jump, but you receive no bonus and
make all jumping-related rolls at -5.
On a critical failure, you fall down!
You may use Flying Leap to jump
into  someone as part of an attack.
Such attacks are at an extra -2 to hit,
but if you do hit, triple your ST for
damage and knockback purposes. In
a slam or collision, calculate Move
from jumping distance as described
for Super Jump (p. 89), and use this
velocity to calculate damage.
Modifiers: -10 if used instantly,
dropping to -5 after 1 turn of concen-
tration, -4 after 2 turns, -3 after 4
turns, -2 after 8 turns, -1 after 16
turns, and no penalty after 32 turns.
Force Sword
see Melee Weapon, p. 208
Force Whip
see Melee Weapon, p. 208
Forced Entry
DX/Easy
Defaults: None.
This is the ability to kick in doors
and windows, or demolish them with
a crowbar, ram, or sledgehammer,
without necessarily being adept at
melee combat. Make a skill roll to hit
an inanimate object with your foot or
an impact weapon. Add +1 per die to
basic thrust or swing damage if you
have this skill at DX+1, +2 per die if
you know it at DX+2 or better. Add a
similar bonus (+1 or +2) to ST rolls
made for forced entry. The damage
bonus also applies when you use
Melee Weapon skills to wreck inani-
mate objects out of combat.
For  subtle break-ins, use
Lockpicking skill (p. 206).
Forensics/TL
IQ/Hard
Defaults: IQ-6 or Criminology-4.
This is the ability to apply the prin-
ciples of forensic science and crimi-
nalistics, such as the computation of
bullet paths and the microscopic or
chemical analysis of clues. Some dis-
ciplines require other skills. For
instance, a forensic pathologist per-
forming an autopsy would roll against
Surgery skill.
Forgery/TL
IQ/Hard
Defaults: IQ-6 or Counterfeiting-2.
This is the ability to create falsified
documents (identity cards, passports,
etc.). It is not taught except by intelli-
gence agencies and the underworld –
although you can always study it on
your own.
The time required to create a for-
gery ranges from days to weeks (GM
decides). When you use a forged doc-
ument, make your Forgery roll each
time it is inspected – unless you roll a
critical success on your first attempt.
Failure means someone spots the for-
gery.
Some tasks require DX-based skill
rolls, in which case modifiers for High
Manual Dexterity (p. 59) or Ham-
Fisted (p. 138) apply. The GM may
allow Forgery to default to a suitable
Artist specialty at -5 if you are doing
the work entirely by hand.
Modifiers:  Equipment modifiers
(p. 345); +3 if you merely altered a gen-
uine document; -5 if you did not have
a sample to copy. The GM may also
assign modifiers based on the severity
of the inspection; a routine border
check, for instance, would give a +5
bonus.
Fortune-Telling†
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5, Fast-Talk-3, or
Occultism-3.
This is the art of interviewing
someone in order to learn more about
his lifestyle and personality, and then
using this information to make an
“educated guess” about his future that
you can pass off as supernatural div-
ination. Suitable props – star charts,
tea leaves, etc. – can enhance the illu-
sion. Knowledge of traditional occult
or religious beliefs (especially those of
your subject) can also lend an air of
legitimacy.
With the GM’s permission, you can
sometimes use Fortune-Telling in
place of Fast-Talk (by making predic-
tions that guide the subject toward a
particular course of action), or
Interrogation or Psychology (by ask-
ing the subject leading questions
under the pretense of telling his for-
tune). This is only possible if the sub-
ject believes you are a genuine for-
tune-teller and you take the time to do
a full “reading” for him.
You must specialize in a particular
mantic art. Available specialties
include Astrology, Augury (interpreta-
tion of natural omens, such as flocks
of birds), Crystal Gazing, Dream
Interpretation, Feng Shui, Palmistry,
and Tarot.
This skill is not  a paranormal tal-
ent, and the GM is under no obligation
to supply you with hints of future
events. You might wish to learn this
skill if you have actual divinatory abil-
ities, though, as it enables you to pres-
ent your predictions in a culturally
acceptable way. “I saw it in the stars”
may be less likely to get you burned as
a witch than “I cast a spell”!
Modifiers: +1 for Sensitive or +3 for
Empathy (p. 51); any Charisma 
bonus; -3 if using Fortune-Telling in
place of Fast-Talk, Interrogation, or
Psychology.
Forward Observer/TL
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5, Artillery (any)-5,
and others.
This is the skill of being a “spotter”
for artillery. It includes locating tar-
gets (with map and compass at TL6-,
global positioning systems and satel-
lite imagery at TL7+), marking targets
(using smoke, a laser designator, etc.),
matching ordnance to target for best
effect, and calling in corrections to
any fire you personally observe.
Failure means the ordnance miss-
es the target; critical failures result in
severe “collateral damage” or “friend-
ly fire” incidents. The very worst crit-
ical failures (GM’s decision) drop the
ordnance on your position!
196 SKILLS




At higher tech levels, Forward
Observer is less about observing tar-
gets and more about operating spe-
cialized technology such as drones,
GPS, and laser designators. To
remotely pilot a drone or use a laser
designator to direct “smart” muni-
tions onto a target, make a DX-based
skill roll. At TL7+, Forward Observer
defaults to Electronics Operation
(any)-5.
Modifiers:  Equipment modifiers
(p. 345); -2 if you are unfamiliar with
the artillery (e.g., aircraft bombs when
you are used to naval guns); -3 per 500
yards between you and the target – but
divide the actual range by the magnifi-
cation of any vision aid first.
Free Fall
DX/Average
Defaults: DX-5 or HT-5.
This is the ability to operate in a
free-fall (zero-gravity) environment.
Roll against the higher of HT or Free
Fall when you first enter free fall; see
Space Adaptation Syndrome (p. 434)
for the effects of failure. In addition,
whenever you make a DX or DX-based
skill roll in free fall, use the lower  of
Free Fall and your DX or skill. For
instance, if you had Free Fall-14 and
Karate-16, you would roll at 14 or less
to land a punch.
Modifiers: +2 for 3D Spatial Sense
(p. 34).
Freight Handling/TL
IQ/Average
Default: IQ-5.
This is the skill of supervising the
loading and unloading of vehicles
(laborers do not require this skill – just
their foreman). A successful skill roll
cuts the time required by 20%. Also
roll against Freight Handling skill any
time there is doubt as to whether an
item of cargo was lost or damaged; on
a success, it made the journey intact.
Gambling
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5 or Mathematics
(Statistics)-5.
This is skill at playing games of
chance. A successful Gambling roll
can (among other things) tell you if a
game is rigged, identify a fellow gam-
bler in a group of strangers, or “esti-
mate the odds” in any tricky situation.
When you gamble against the house,
make a skill roll (the GM will secretly
modify this roll if the odds are poor!).
When you gamble against someone
else, roll a Regular Contest of
Gambling (p. 197) until one of you
wins.
Sleight of Hand skill (p. 221) is
helpful if you want to cheat! To spot a
cheater, roll a Quick Contest of your
Gambling or Vision roll, whichever is
higher,  vs. your opponent’s Sleight of
Hand skill (for card or dice tricks) or
IQ (for other kinds of cheating).
Modifiers:  +1 to +5 for familiarity
with the game being played; -1 to -5 if
the game is rigged against you; -3 for
Killjoy (p. 140), since you don’t care if
you win or lose.
Games†
IQ/Easy
Default: IQ-4.
This is the ability to play a game
well. It includes knowledge of rules,
etiquette, and tournament regula-
tions. You must specialize in a partic-
ular game; possibilities include tradi-
tional board games (such as chess, Go,
hnefatafl, and  mankala), card games,
war games, and computer games.
Many cultures regard the ability to
play one or more games skillfully as a
worthwhile social accomplishment.
People often stake vast sums on
games, and it might be possible to
earn a living as a professional gamer.
Games may also be played to settle
disputes. In a fantasy world, a power-
ful monster or wizard might even
challenge a hero to a game – with his
life or the lives of his companions at
stake!
Knowledge of the rules of a given
sport is also a Games skill, but unlike
other Games skills, sports specialties
only allow you to judge an event. To
play,  learn the associated Sports
(p. 222) or Combat Sport (p. 184) skill.
As a referee, roll against skill to adju-
dicate a match, spot a subtle foul,
determine the winner in a “photo fin-
ish” situation, etc. As an athlete, you
can use Games to make an Influence
roll (see Influence Rolls, p. 359) when
dealing with a referee or judge, but
this use is always at -3 or worse.
When you take a sports specialty,
specify both the sport and the league
or tournament type; e.g., Games (NFL
Football) or Games (Olympic Judo).
The rules of different leagues within
the same sport default to one another
at -2.
Modifiers:  Cultural Familiarity
modifiers (p. 23). Long-lived games
have a body of knowledge that grows
through time; therefore, when gamers
from different times compete, the
player from later in the timeline gets
+1 to effective skill.
Gardening
IQ/Easy
Defaults: IQ-4 or Farming-3.
This is the ability to care for plants
on a small scale. (For large-scale
crops, use Farming skill, p. 194.) A
skill roll lets you grow food, medicinal
herbs, attractive flowers and trees, etc.
Modifiers: -2 to -4 for an unfamiliar
method (e.g., hydroponics or bonsai
when you’re used to your back yard),
crop (herbs, trees, and vegetables all
differ), or geographical region. These
three penalties are cumulative!
Garrote
DX/Easy
Default: DX-4.
This is the ability to strangle a vic-
tim with a rope or a wire. See Special
Melee Weapon Rules (p. 404) for
details. Note that you cannot use a
garrote to parry.
SKILLS 197
People often stake vast sums on games, 
and it might be possible to earn a living 
as a professional gamer.




Geography/TL†
IQ/Hard
Defaults: IQ-6 and others.
This is the study of the physical,
political, and economic divisions of a
planet, and how they interact. It is
part physical science, part social sci-
ence. You must specialize:
Physical: The study of the physical
properties of a planetary surface. A
physical geographer could answer
questions about climate, terrain, and
so forth. You must further specialize
by planet type; see Planet Types
(p. 180).  Defaults: Geology (same 
planet type)-4 or Meteorology (same
planet type)-4.
Political: The study of political
regions – their borders, natural
resources, industries, etc. A political
geographer could answer questions
about land claims, overpopulation,
regional economic disparities, trans-
portation networks, etc. Default:
Economics-4.
Regional:  The study of all of the
above, but specific to a single region:
New York, the United States, planet
Earth, etc. The depth of knowledge
decreases with the size of the region
(see Area Knowledge, p. 176).  Default:
the relevant Area Knowledge skill at -6.
These specialties default among
themselves at -5.
Geology/TL†
IQ/Hard
Defaults: IQ-6, Geography
(Physical)-4, or Prospecting-5.
This is the science dealing with the
structure of planets – their crust, man-
tle, and core. A geologist knows about
minerals, oil, ores, etc.; about earth-
quakes and volcanoes; and about fos-
sils. In the field, he can attempt to find
water by using an “eye for country”
(see Survival, p. 223).
You must specialize by planet type.
See Planet Types (p. 180) for details.
Gesture
IQ/Easy
Default: IQ-4.
This is the ability to communicate
through improvised hand signals. A
successful skill roll will let you convey
one simple idea to another person, or
understand one simple idea he is
attempting to get across to you.
Gesture is not suited to complex com-
munication, however.
Modifiers:  Cultural Familiarity
modifiers (p. 23) definitely apply!
Different cultures develop distinct ges-
ture vocabularies.
Group Performance†
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5 and others.
This is the ability to arrange a per-
formance and direct a group of per-
formers in its execution – in rehearsal,
in a studio, or before a live audience. A
successful roll means the performance
is pleasing. You must  specialize in a
particular performing art. All special-
ties have prerequisites: the specific
skills listed below, plus any one of
Diplomacy, Intimidation, or
Leadership.
Choreography:  The ability to
instruct and lead a group of dancers.
Prerequisite:  Dancing.  Default:
Dancing-2.
Conducting:  The ability to coordi-
nate a group of musicians. Choirs,
swing bands, symphony orchestras,
etc. are different familiarities; see
Familiarity (p. 169). Prerequisites: Any
two Musical Instrument skills, or one
Musical Instrument and Singing.
Defaults: Musical Instrument-2 or
Singing-2.
Directing:  The ability to direct a
group of actors. Film, opera, televi-
sion, and theater are different famil-
iarities.  Prerequisite: Performance.
Default: Performance-5.
Fight Choreography: Similar to
Choreography, but for Stage Combat
(p. 222) instead of Dancing.
Prerequisite: Stage Combat. Default:
Stage Combat-2.
Gunner/TL†
DX/Easy
Default: DX-4.
This is the ability to use a heavy
weapon, usually one mounted on a tri-
pod or a vehicle, to make a direct-fire
attack – that is, to aim and fire at a tar-
get to which you have a line of sight.
For  indirect fire, use Artillery skill
(p. 178). Roll against Gunner skill to
hit the target.
Make an IQ-based skill roll to take
immediate action (e.g., clear a stop-
page or restart a crashed targeting
computer), should your weapon fail.
Loaders can make ST-based skill rolls
to improve the rate of fire of certain
crew-served weapons; see individual
weapon descriptions for details.
You  must  specialize by weapon
type. The available specialties vary by
TL, but include one or more of:
Beams: Any kind of heavy directed-
energy weapon: laser, particle beam,
etc.
Cannon: Any kind of heavy projec-
tile weapon – e.g., the main gun of a
tank or an ultra-tech railgun on a star-
ship – that fires single shots.
Catapult: Any kind of large, direct-
fire mechanical bolt-thrower, such as
a ballista.
Machine Gun: Any kind of heavy
projectile weapon capable of firing
bursts.
Rockets: Any kind of free-flight
rocket fired from a mount.
These specialties default to one
another at -4. The weapons covered by
each specialty vary by TL. For
instance, Gunner (Machine Gun) cov-
ers hand-cranked Gatling guns at TL5,
automatic machine guns at TL6, auto-
cannon at TL7, and electromagnetic
machine guns at TL9+.
Familiarity is crucial here!
Gunner/TL7 (Machine Gun) covers
both tripod-mounted machine guns
and aircraft autocannon, but going
from one to the other gives you -2 for
weapon type (machine gun to auto-
cannon), -2 for aiming system (open
sights to HUD), and -2 for mount (tri-
pod to hull mount), for a net -6 to skill
until you familiarize yourself with all
the differences.
Modifiers:  All applicable ranged
combat modifiers; -2 for an unfamiliar
aiming system (e.g., a camera when
you’re used to open sights) or mount
(e.g., a tripod when you’re used to a
turret), or for an unfamiliar weapon of
a known type (e.g., .30-cal when you
are used to .50s); -4 or more for a
weapon in bad repair.
Guns/TL†
DX/Easy
Default: DX-4.
198 SKILLS




This is the ability to use a hand-
held chemical-propellant or mass-
driver projectile weapon. Roll against
Guns skill to hit your target.
Make an IQ-based skill roll to take
immediate action (e.g., eject a dud
round), should your weapon fail.
You  must  specialize by weapon
type. The available specialties vary by
TL, but include one or more of:
Grenade Launcher (GL): Any large-
bore, low-powered small arm that
fires a bursting projectile. Includes
under-barrel grenade launchers, flare
pistols, and ultra-tech “tanglers.”
Gyroc: Any kind of small arm that
fires miniature rockets.
Light Anti-Armor Weapon (LAW):
All forms of rocket launchers and
recoilless rifles.
Light Machine Gun (LMG): Any
machine gun fired from the hip or a
bipod.
Musket:  Any kind of smoothbore
long arm (usually, but not always, a
black powder weapon) that fires a
solid projectile.
Pistol: All kinds of handguns,
including derringers, pepperboxes,
revolvers, and automatics, but not
machine pistols.
Rifle: Any kind of rifled long arm –
assault rifle, hunting rifle, sniper rifle,
etc. – that fires a solid projectile.
Shotgun: Any kind of smoothbore
long arm that fires multiple projectiles
(flechettes, shot, etc.).
Submachine Gun (SMG): All short,
fully automatic weapons that fire pis-
tol-caliber ammunition, including
machine pistols.
Most of these specialties default to
one another at -2, but defaults involv-
ing GL, Gyroc, or LAW are at -4 in
either direction. The weapons covered
by each specialty vary by TL. For
example, Guns (Rifle) covers muzzle-
loaders at TL4, lever actions at TL5,
and self-loaders at TL6+. In particular,
ammunition varies with TL, from
black powder and loose shot at TL4, to
smokeless powder cartridges at TL6,
to power cells and metallic slivers for
TL9+ electromagnetic guns.
Familiarity is crucial here! Guns
(Rifle) covers both bolt-action
12.7mm sniper rifles and 5.56mm
assault rifles, but going from one to
the other gives you -2 for weapon type
(12.7mm to 5.56mm), -2 for action
(bolt-action to self-loader), and -2 for
grip (bipod to hand-held), for a total of
-6 to skill until you familiarize yourself
with all the differences.
Modifiers:  All applicable ranged
combat modifiers; -2 for an unfamiliar
action (e.g., an automatic when you’re
used to a revolver) or grip (e.g., a
shoulder-fired antitank weapon when
you’re used to a bipod), or for an unfa-
miliar weapon of a known type (e.g., a
5.56mm rifle when you are used to a
7.62mm rifle); -4 or more for a
weapon in bad repair.
Hazardous
Materials/TL†
IQ/Average
Default: IQ-5.
This is the skill of transporting,
storing, and disposing of hazardous
materials (“HazMat”). It includes
preparing the records that accompany
HazMat shipments; applying and
identifying warning labels and mark-
ings; and knowledge of countermea-
sures, antidotes, and containment and
decontamination procedures. (To
operate  personal protective gear, use
the NBC Suit skill, p. 192.)
You  must specialize by type of
HazMat. Common specialties are
Biological, Chemical, and Radio-
active, but more exotic options (e.g.,
Magical or Nanotech) may exist in
some settings. Mundane specialties
default to one another at -5; exotic
specialties often have no default at all.
Whenever you deal with HazMat in
any capacity, roll against the lower of
the skill used for the task (Driving,
Freight Handling, etc.) and the appli-
cable Hazardous Materials specialty
or default. Note that the IQ-5 default
represents any layman’s knowledge of
household hazards. HazMat profes-
sionals  deliberately keep certain
aspects of this skill (notably HazMat
markings) obscure to avoid alarming
the general public. The default does
not apply when dealing with such
things.
Heraldry
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5 or Savoir-Faire
(High Society)-3.
This is the skill of recognizing and
designing coats of arms, crests, flags,
tartans, and other emblems. A suc-
cessful roll lets you recognize a knight
or a noble from his banner or shield,
create attractive and proper arms
(without conflicting with existing
designs), etc.
In some settings, you might have to
specialize in a particular type  of
Heraldry: Coats of Arms (the usual
specialty, described above), Corporate
Logos (defaults to Current Affairs
(Business)-3), or even Graffiti Tags
(defaults to Streetwise-3).
Modifiers:  Cultural Familiarity
modifiers (p. 23). Up to +5 to recog-
nize a well-known design, and down
to -5 for an obscure design or one that
was retired long ago.
Herb Lore/TL
IQ/Very Hard
Defaults: None.
Prerequisite: Naturalist.
This is the ability to manufacture
herbal concoctions that have magical
effects – healing balms, love potions,
etc. It only exists in magical game
worlds, where it functions much as
Alchemy skill (p. 174). Unlike
Alchemy, Herb Lore does not include
the ability to analyze “elixirs.” On the
other hand, an expert at this skill can
locate magical ingredients for free in
the wild by making a few Naturalist
rolls, while an alchemist requires rare
and expensive materials (such as alka-
hest, dragon’s blood, gemstones, and
gold) to do his work.
Hidden Lore†
IQ/Average
Defaults: None.
This skill represents knowledge
that is lost, deliberately hidden, or
simply neglected. Whatever the rea-
son, the general public is unaware of
it. It is only available to those who
study it specifically.
You must specialize in a particular
body of secret knowledge. If you wish
to enter play with Hidden Lore skills,
you must account for this specific
knowledge in your character story.
The GM might even require you to
purchase an Unusual Background
before you can learn Hidden Lore
skills. Of course, the GM is also free to
forbid  Hidden Lore skills to starting
characters . . . or to PCs in general!
SKILLS 199




To acquire Hidden Lore in play,
you must find a reliable source of rel-
evant information. The GM may
choose to tie skill increases in Hidden
Lore to specific acts – such as reading
moldy tomes – instead of allowing you
to spend points freely. For instance, an
ancient manuscript might let you
spend up to eight points (and no
more) on a specific Hidden Lore skill.
Remember that most Hidden Lore
is secret because somebody powerful
wants it kept that way. Thus, dis-
cussing or revealing your knowledge
can be extremely hazardous.
Possible Hidden Lore specialties
include:
Conspiracies:  You know details
about the conspiracies that underlie
every aspect of society. This is factual
knowledge (e.g., truths about the
Illuminati), not the ability to analyze
conspiracies. Only available in set-
tings where vast conspiracies really do
exist.
Demon Lore: You know the secrets
of Hell, the goals of demons in the
mortal world, and possibly even the
names of specific demons.
Faerie Lore: You have detailed
knowledge of the faeries and their
secret kingdom(s).
Spirit Lore: You know about ghosts
and other spirit entities – names,
motivations, etc.
Hiking
HT/Average
Default: HT-5.
This skill represents training for
endurance walking, hiking, and
marching. It includes knowledge of
how to pace yourself in different con-
ditions, and how best to carry a pack.
Make a Hiking roll before each day’s
march; on a success, increase the dis-
tance traveled by 20%. The GM may
allow bonuses for good maps and
good walking shoes, but not for ter-
rain. If a party is traveling together, all
must make the Hiking roll in order to
get the increased distance. See Hiking
(p. 351).
History†
IQ/Hard
Default: IQ-6.
This is the study of the recorded
past (compare Archaeology skill,
p. 176). A successful skill roll lets you
answer questions about history, and
might (at the GM’s option) allow you
to remember a useful parallel: “Ah,
yes. Hannibal faced a situation like
this once, and here’s what he did . . .”
You must specialize. There are two
general classes of specialty:
• A limited geographical region –
no larger than a small nation – over
multiple eras. Examples:  History
(Bavarian), History (Irish), or History
(New York State).
• A single era (e.g., Victorian peri-
od, 20th century) and one of a broad
geographical region (e.g., Europe), 
a culture (e.g., Muslim), or an 
idea (e.g., economic, esoteric, 
or military). Examples:  History
(20th-Century American), History
(Ottoman Muslim), or History
(Napoleonic Military).
The sheer variety of possible spe-
cialties makes it impossible to list all
possible defaults. In general, if two
specialties overlap at all, then GM
should permit a default at -2 to -4.
Hobby Skill
DX or IQ/Easy
Default: DX-4 or IQ-4, depending
on the controlling attribute.
Many fields of study have little to
do with adventuring or making a liv-
ing – but people study them nonethe-
less. Each of these is a separate Hobby
Skill. Those that require agility or a
delicate touch (e.g., juggling, kite fly-
ing, needlepoint, and origami) are
DX/Easy skills that default to DX-4,
while those that focus on knowledge
and trivia (e.g., comic books, rock
music, science fiction, and tropical
fish) are IQ/Easy skills that default to
IQ-4.
A few points in a Hobby Skill can
make roleplaying more fun – and pos-
sibly come in handy once in a while.
You do not need a teacher to learn or
improve a Hobby Skill. However, you
cannot learn skills defined elsewhere
in this chapter as Hobby Skills.
Holdout
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5 or Sleight of Hand-3.
This is the skill of concealing items
on your person or on other people
(usually with their cooperation). An
item’s size and shape govern its con-
cealability. Some examples:
+4: A BB-sized jewel, a postage
stamp.
+3: A pea-sized jewel.
+2: One lockpick, a huge jewel, a
dime, a TL9+ computer disk, a letter.
+1: A set of lockpicks, a silver dol-
lar.
0: A TL8 floppy disk or CD, without
case.
-1: A dagger, a slingshot, the tiniest
handgun or grenade.
-2: An average handgun (e.g., a
Luger), a grenade, a large knife.
-3: A submachine gun, a short-
sword, a short carbine.
-4: A broadsword, an assault rifle.
-5: A bastard sword, a battle rifle.
-6: A crossbow, a heavy sniper rifle.
Things that move or make noise
give an additional -1 or more to skill.
Clothing also modifies effective
skill. A Carmelite nun in full habit (+5
to skill) could conceal a bazooka or a
battle-axe from an eyeball search. A
Las Vegas showgirl in costume (-5 to
skill) would have trouble hiding even a
dagger. Of course, the showgirl might
escape search entirely (unless the
guards were bored) because “She
obviously couldn’t hide anything in
that outfit!” Full nudity is -7 to skill.
A proper concealment holster
helps conceal a weapon; use the
equipment modifiers on p. 345.
Clothing designed specifically to hide
things gives a bonus of up to +4.
To spot a concealed item, roll a
Quick Contest of Search skill vs.
Holdout. Search defaults to
Perception-5 if you haven’t studied it.
See  Search  (p. 219) for additional
rules.
Housekeeping
IQ/Easy
Default: IQ-4.
This is the ability to manage a
household. It covers both home eco-
nomics and domestic chores: clean-
ing, cooking (but not haute cuisine,
which requires the Cooking skill),
minor repairs (any routine mainte-
nance task that calls for a roll against
Carpentry, Sewing, or a similar skill at
+4 or better), etc. The main use of
Housekeeping is to qualify for the job
200 SKILLS




of “homemaker,” but it can come in
handy on adventures – for instance, to
clean up evidence!
Hypnotism
IQ/Hard
Defaults: None.
This is the skill of inducing a sug-
gestible state in another person
through verbal or mechanical means.
It requires five seconds and a success-
ful skill roll to use. If you fail on a
cooperative subject, you may try again.
The second attempt takes five min-
utes,  and the roll is at -5. If this
attempt fails, you may not try to hyp-
notize the subject again that day.
A successful Hypnotism attempt
puts the subject to sleep. This counts
as an anesthetic for the purpose of
Surgery. At the GM’s option, further
Hypnotism rolls might help the sub-
ject remember something he had for-
gotten, while Psychology rolls might
help him get over mental problems.
A hypnotized individual is extreme-
ly suggestible. Roll a Quick Contest of
Hypnotism vs. the victim’s Will for
each suggestion. The subject resists
suggestions that threaten his life or his
loved ones, or that go strongly against
his character, at +5. You may also give
“posthypnotic suggestions,” instruct-
ing the subject to do something in
response to a trigger after the hypno-
sis ends. The subject’s resistance roll
for such suggestions takes place when
he encounters the trigger. He resists at
+1 to Will per week since he was hyp-
notized.
You cannot  use Hypnotism as an
attack, except in highly cinematic
games. You can use it on an unaware
or unwilling subject out of combat,
but he resists at Will+5. If he resists
the initial attempt, he is considered
uncooperative, and you may not make
a second attempt that day. A subject
who is unfamiliar with Hypnotism
might not know what you attempted,
but he suspects something – possibly
witchcraft!
In all cases, a hypnotic trance lasts
1d hours unless you end it sooner.
Modifiers: +2 if you send hypnotic
suggestions via Telesend (see Tele-
communication, p. 91), since voices in
the head are harder to ignore.
Immovable Stance
DX/Hard
Defaults: None.
Prerequisite: Trained By A Master.
This skill allows you to anchor
yourself to the ground by properly
channeling your chi, using secret bal-
ancing techniques, etc. Make a skill
roll whenever an attack (e.g., a shove
or the Push skill, p. 216) would result
in knockback or a fall.
On a success, you neither experi-
ence knockback nor fall down. On a
failure, you are knocked back but still
get the usual DX roll to avoid falling
down. On a critical failure, you auto-
matically suffer full knockback and
you fall down.
This skill also helps against attacks
with the Judo skill (p. 203). If you fail
your active defense (or choose not to
defend) against a Judo throw, your
attacker must win a Quick Contest of
Judo vs. your Immovable Stance skill,
or his throw fails.
Modifiers: -1 per yard of potential
knockback; +4 for Perfect Balance
(p. 74).
Innate Attack†
DX/Easy
Default: DX-4.
This skill represents trained ability
with a “built-in” ranged  attack: fiery
breath, super-powered energy bolts,
etc. Learn it to improve your odds of
hitting with Afflictions (p. 35),
Bindings (p. 40), Innate Attacks
(p. 61), magical jets and missiles, and
similar attacks that originate from you
as opposed to a weapon in your hand.
Roll against skill to hit.
You must specialize:
Beam:  Any energy blast, magical
jet, etc. emitted from the hands. To use
this skill, you must have at least one
unrestrained hand (although it need
not be empty).
Breath:  Any attack emitted from
the mouth, such as dragon’s fire or
acidic sputum. To use this skill, you
cannot be gagged and you must  be
facing your target.
Gaze: Any attack emitted from the
eyes – heat vision, a petrifying stare,
etc. To use this skill, you cannot be
blindfolded and you must  be facing
your target.
Projectile:  Any solid projectile or
pseudo-solid energy bolt (e.g., Fireball
spell) emitted from the hands. To use
this skill, you must have at least one
unrestrained hand (although it need
not be empty).
These specialties default to one
another at -2.
You use this skill to direct  your
attack, not to activate  it; therefore,
restrictions such as “you cannot be
gagged” apply strictly to your ability to
make ranged attacks. If you can trigger
your attack while restrained, no skill
roll is needed to attack your restraints!
You can only learn this skill for
ranged attacks. Use Brawling (p. 182)
to improve your odds with abilities
that require a touch.
Intelligence Analysis/TL
IQ/Hard
Defaults: IQ-6 or Strategy (any)-6.
This is the ability to analyze and
interpret intelligence data. It allows
you to deduce enemy plans and capa-
bilities, evaluate the accuracy of infor-
mation, rate the reliability of sources,
etc. In most game worlds, only intelli-
gence, military, and security services
teach this skill – often only to those
with a minimum level of Rank or
Security Clearance.
The GM makes all Intelligence
Analysis rolls in secret. On a success,
he provides details about the signifi-
cance and accuracy of your data, or
insights into what it means in terms of
enemy planning. When you encounter
deliberately falsified data, the GM
rolls a secret Quick Contest: your
Intelligence Analysis vs. the enemy’s
skill at disinformation (Forgery,
Propaganda, etc.). If you win, the GM
provides details on precisely what is
wrong with the information. It is up to
you to deduce what this means, how-
ever!
This skill has nothing to do with
gathering  intelligence. Use Current
Affairs (p.186) and Research (p. 217) to
sift through public sources; Forensics
(p. 196) and Search (p. 219) to find
physical clues; Observation (p. 211) for
human surveillance; and Electronics
Operation (p. 189) to work with the
satellite imagery, communications
intercepts, and related “technical
means” common at TL7+.
SKILLS 201




You may take an optional specialty
(p. 169) in one particular type of intel-
ligence. A useful specialty at TL6+ is
Intelligence Analysis (Traffic
Analysis): identifying the purpose and
organization of targets by examining
intercepted communications traffic.
Modifiers: -1 to -5 for incomplete
information; -3 if all your information
comes from a single source; -3 for
intelligence concerning an arcane sci-
entific or bureaucratic principle,
unless you have skill in that area (e.g.,
Engineer (Electronics) for intelligence
regarding a radar installation).
Interrogation
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5, Intimidation-3, or
Psychology-4.
This is the ability to question a pris-
oner. Only intelligence agencies, police
and prison services, the military, and
the underworld teach this skill.
Roll a Quick Contest of
Interrogation vs. the prisoner’s Will for
each question. This requires 5 minutes
per question. If you win, you get a
truthful answer. If you tie or lose, the
victim remains silent or lies. If you lose
by more than five points, he tells you a
good, believable lie! The GM roleplays
the prisoner (or, if you are the prisoner,
the GM will roleplay the interrogator)
and makes all die rolls in secret.
Modifiers: -5 if the prisoner’s loyal-
ty to his leader or cause is “Very Good”
or “Excellent”; -3 for Low Empathy
(p. 142); +2 for a lengthy interrogation
(over two hours); +3 if you use severe
threats; +6 if you use torture*.
Increase these last two bonuses by +1
if you have the Callous disadvantage
(p. 125)!
* “Torture” does not necessarily
mean thumbscrews and the rack.
Exposing a prisoner to the object of his
phobia (see Phobias, p. 148) is an effec-
tive torture, as is a believable threat
against a loved one. Note that tortur-
ing a prisoner is usually considered vile
behavior, likely bringing retribution.
Intimidation
Will/Average
Defaults: Will-5 or Acting-3.
This is the skill of hostile persua-
sion. The essence of Intimidation is to
convince the subject that you are able
and willing, perhaps even eager, to do
something awful to him.
You can substitute an Intimidation
attempt for any reaction roll; see
Influence Rolls (p. 359).  Exception:
You cannot intimidate someone who
has the Unfazeable advantage!
The results of a successful
Intimidation attempt depend on the
target. An honest citizen probably
cooperates, sullenly or with false
cheer. A low-life might lick your boots
(even becoming genuinely loyal). A
really tough sort might react well
without being frightened: “You’re my
kind of scum!” The GM decides, and
roleplays it. If you rolled a critical suc-
cess – or if the subject critically failed
his Will roll – your victim must make
a Fright Check in addition to the other
results of the Influence roll!
Group Intimidation: You may
attempt to intimidate up to 25 people
at once, at -1 to skill per five people (or
fraction thereof) in the group.
Multiple intimidators can attempt to
intimidate proportionally larger
groups; for instance, three thugs could
try to intimidate up to 75 people! Base
the skill penalty on the size of the tar-
get group divided by the number of
intimidators (round up). Resolve the
outcome with a single Quick Contest:
the highest effective Intimidation skill
from among the intimidators vs. the
highest modified Will in the target
group.
Specious Intimidation: You can
attempt a Quick Contest of Fast-Talk
vs. the subject’s IQ before  your
Intimidation attempt in order to
appear to be intimidating when you
can’t back it up. If you win, you are at
+3 on the subsequent Intimidation
attempt, which can go a long way
toward offsetting the high Will and
Fearlessness of martial arts masters,
world leaders, etc. If you tie or lose,
however, your Intimidation attempt
fails automatically,  and you suffer a
“Very Bad” reaction instead of just a
“Bad” one!
Modifiers:  +1 to +4 for displays of
strength, bloodthirstiness, or supernat-
ural powers (GM’s judgment); increase
this bonus by +1 if you are Callous
(p. 125). Appearance (p. 21) matters: +2
if you are Hideous, +3 if Monstrous, or
+4 if Horrific. Size also matters: add
your Size Modifier and subtract the
subject’s. Appropriate Reputation mod-
ifiers (positive or negative) certainly
count! You get -1 for Oblivious (p. 146)
and -1 to -4 for Shyness (p. 154).
Subtract the subject’s  Fearlessness
(p. 55) from your roll. The GM may
assign a +1 or -1 for especially appro-
priate or clumsy dialog. Requests for
aid are always at -3 or worse.
Invisibility Art
IQ/Very Hard
Defaults: None.
Prerequisites: Trained By A Master,
and both Hypnotism and Stealth at
14+.
This is the fabled skill, often attrib-
uted to ninja and other martial-arts
masters, of being able to stand in plain
sight without being noticed. It
requires one second of concentration
to activate. After that time, roll a
Quick Contest once per second:  your
Invisibility Art vs. the Vision roll of
each person who can see you.
Viewers must apply the current
darkness penalty to their Vision roll. A
viewer who is concentrating on some-
thing else or otherwise distracted is at
-3; one who is specifically looking for
intruders gets +3. If someone sees you
and raises the alarm, by pointing and
crying out, those who believe the
warning get +3 on their next roll.
If you win, that person is unable to
see you for one second. Otherwise, he
can see you normally. Once someone
notices you, he is unaffected by this
skill until you can get out of sight
somehow (which might be as easy as
stepping into a shadow), whereupon
you may try again.
Note that this skill does not work at
all in combat. In particular, if you
attack  anyone,  you will immediately
become visible to everyone!
Modifiers:  +3 if you use a smoke
bomb or flash grenade before you
attempt your roll (you appear to van-
ish in a cloud of smoke). Your move-
ment modifies your skill roll rather
than viewers’ Vision rolls: no modifier
if you stand still (Move 0), -1 if you
move at a slow walk (Move 1), -2 at a
fast walk (Move 2), or -5 at a run
(Move 3+). If you stand perfectly  still
(requires a successful Breath Control
or Meditation roll), you get +1.
202 SKILLS




Jeweler/TL
IQ/Hard
Defaults: IQ-6, Smith (Copper)-4,
or Smith (Lead and Tin)-4.
This is the ability to work with pre-
cious metals, make jewelry, decorate
weapons, etc. A successful skill roll
allows you to identify a precious metal
or gem, or determine the value of a
precious bauble.
Jitte/Sai
see Melee Weapon, p. 208
Judo
DX/Hard
Defaults: None.
This skill represents any advanced
training at unarmed throws and grap-
ples – not just the eponymous
Japanese martial art.
Judo allows you to parry two differ-
ent  attacks per turn, one with each
hand. Your Parry score is (skill/2) + 3,
rounded down. This parry is not at the
usual -3 for parrying a weapon bare-
handed, greatly reducing the likeli-
hood of injury when you defend
against an armed foe. In addition,
Judo gives an improved retreating
bonus when you parry; see Retreat
(p. 377). For complete rules for parry-
ing barehanded, see Parrying Unarmed
(p. 376).
On the turn immediately after a
successful Judo parry, you may
attempt to throw your attacker if he is
within one yard. This counts as an
attack; roll vs. Judo skill to hit. (Note
that in an All-Out Attack, you cannot
attempt two throws, but you can make
one attempt at +4.) Your foe may use
any active defense – he can parry your
hand with a weapon! If his defense
fails, you throw him.
When you throw a foe, he falls
where you please. On a battle map, he
lands in any two hexes near you. One
of these hexes must be his starting
hex, your hex, or any hex adjacent to
one of those hexes. Your victim must
roll against HT; a failed roll means he
is stunned! If you throw him into
someone else, that person must roll
against the higher of ST+3 or DX+3 to
avoid being knocked down.
Finally, you may use your Judo skill
instead of your DX for any DX roll
made in close combat except to draw a
weapon or drop a shield. If you grapple
a foe using Judo, and he fails to break
free, you may make a Judo attack to
throw him on your next turn, exactly
as if you had parried his attack.
To use Judo, any hand with which
you wish to parry or grapple must be
empty. Because Judo relies heavily on
footwork, all Judo rolls and Judo par-
ries take a penalty equal to your
encumbrance level. For instance,
Heavy encumbrance would give you
-3 to hit or to parry an enemy attack.
Jumping
DX/Easy
Defaults: None.
This skill represents trained jump-
ing ability. When you attempt a diffi-
cult jump, roll against the higher  of
Jumping or DX. In addition, you may
use half your Jumping skill (round
down) instead of Basic Move when
calculating jumping distance. For
instance, Jumping-14 would let you
jump if you had Basic Move 7. See
Jumping (p. 352).
Karate
DX/Hard
Defaults: None.
This skill represents any advanced
training at unarmed striking, not just
the Okinawan martial art of karate.
Roll against Karate to hit with a
punch (at no -4 for the “off” hand), or
Karate-2 to hit with a kick. You cannot
use Karate to attack with claws, teeth,
etc., or with a blackjack – use
Brawling (p. 182) for that. Karate skill
does let you make several special
attacks, however; see Special Unarmed
Combat Techniques (p. 403).
Karate improves damage: if you
know Karate at DX level, add +1 per
die to basic thrust damage when you
calculate damage with Karate attacks:
punches, kicks, elbow strikes, etc. Add
+2 per die if you know Karate at DX+1
or better! Work out damage ahead of
time and record it on your character
sheet.
Karate allows you to parry two dif-
ferent  attacks per turn, one with each
hand. Your Parry score is (skill/2) + 3,
rounded down. This parry is not at the
usual -3 for parrying a weapon bare-
handed, greatly reducing the likeli-
hood of injury when you defend
against an armed foe. In addition,
Karate gives an improved retreating
bonus when you parry; see Retreat
(p. 377). For more on parrying bare-
handed, see Parrying Unarmed (p. 376).
To use Karate, any hand with
which you wish to strike or parry must
be empty (but you are free to wear
heavy gauntlets, brass knuckles, etc. to
increase damage). Because Karate
relies heavily on footwork, all Karate
attacks and parries take a penalty
equal to your encumbrance level. For
instance, Heavy encumbrance would
give you -3 to hit or to parry an enemy
attack.
Kiai
HT/Hard
Defaults: None.
Prerequisites: Trained By A Master
or Weapon Master.
You can channel your chi outward
in a mighty shout (kiai) that freezes
lesser foes. This counts as an attack,
and costs 1 FP per attempt, successful
or not.
Roll a Quick Contest: your Kiai
skill vs. your target’s Will. You are at -1
for every full two yards of distance.
Your victim resists at +1 if he is Hard
of Hearing, at +2 if Deaf! If you win,
your target is mentally stunned (see
Effects of Stun, p. 420).
This skill only works against a sin-
gle victim; everyone can hear the
shout, but your chi is focused on that
one foe. However, a successful Kiai
roll gives you +2 to Intimidation rolls
vs. everyone within earshot.
Knife
see Melee Weapon, p. 208
Knot-Tying
DX/Easy
Defaults: DX-4, Climbing-4, or
Seamanship-4.
This is the ability to tie a wide vari-
ety of knots quickly and efficiently. A
successful skill roll lets you make a
noose, tie someone up, etc. If you bind
someone using this skill, he must win
a Quick Contest of Escape vs. your
Knot-Tying skill to free himself.
Modifiers:  +1 per level of High
Manual Dexterity (p. 59), or -3 per
level of Ham-Fisted (p. 138).
SKILLS 203




Kusari
see Melee Weapon, p. 208
Lance
DX/Average
Defaults: DX-5 or Spear-3.
Prerequisite: Riding.
The ability to use the lance: a long,
spear-like weapon wielded from
horseback. This is not  a Melee
Weapon skill (see p. 208). You may not
use a lance to parry – you must block
or dodge enemy attacks.
Lasso
DX/Average
Defaults: None.
This is the skill of throwing the lar-
iat: a long rope or thong with a sliding
noose at one end. Its intended purpose
is to snare animals, but it can also
entangle opponents in combat – see
Special Ranged Weapons (p. 410).
Law†
IQ/Hard
Default: IQ-6.
This skill represents knowledge of
law codes and jurisprudence. A suc-
cessful roll lets you remember,
deduce, or figure out the answer to a
question about the law. Few legal
questions have clear-cut answers,
however – even an expert will hedge
his advice!
You must specialize. There are two
general classes of specialty:
• The laws of a particular political
region (e.g., Canada or France) within
a specific field (constitutional, con-
tract, criminal, police, etc.). Examples:
Law (British Criminal), Law
(Canadian Constitutional), and Law
(U.S. Contract).
• A specialized body of law not
associated with a political region.
Examples: Law (Catholic Canon), Law
(International), and Law (Space).
Specialties within the same region,
such as Law (British Criminal) and
Law (British Police), or field, such as
Law (British Criminal) and Law
(French Criminal), default to one
another at -4. If both region and field
differ, the default is -6 or worse.
In some times and places, a Quick
Contest of Law (Criminal) between
the defense and prosecution will
determine the outcome of a trial. In
others, Law functions as an Influence
skill (see Influence Rolls, p. 359) used
to sway the rulings of the judge.
Law enforcers nearly always have a
point or two in Law (Police) for their
region. This represents knowledge of
“proper procedure” when it comes to
arrests, evidence handling, interroga-
tion, etc.
Leadership
IQ/Average
Default: IQ-5.
This is the ability to coordinate a
group. Make a Leadership roll to lead
NPCs into a dangerous or stressful sit-
uation. (PCs can decide for themselves
if they want to follow you!)
You may attempt a Leadership roll
in combat if you spend your turn
doing nothing  but giving orders and
encouragement. On a success, every-
one on your side who can hear you
(including PCs) has +1 on all combat-
related Fright Checks and morale
checks, and on self-control rolls for
disadvantages that would reduce com-
bat efficiency (such as Berserk and
Cowardice – or Bloodlust, if you wish
to take prisoners). A critical success
gives +2. The bonus lasts until your
next turn, at which time you may roll
again. A group can have only one
leader, however! If multiple people
attempt Leadership rolls, no one gets a
bonus.
Note that a minimum level of
Leadership is often a prerequisite for
high Rank (p. 29).
Modifiers: Any bonus for Charisma
(p. 41); -3 for Low Empathy (p. 142);
-1 to -4 for Shyness (p. 154). -5 if the
NPCs have never been in action with
you; -5 if you are sending them into
danger but not going yourself; +5 if
their loyalty to you is “Good”; +10 if
their loyalty is “Very Good.” If their
loyalty is “Excellent,” you do not have
to roll!
204 SKILLS




Leatherworking
DX/Easy
Default: DX-4.
This is the ability to work with
leather to make belts, saddles, armor,
etc. A successful skill roll lets you
repair or create leather goods. Make
an IQ-based roll to design items that
are more artistic than functional.
Modifiers:  Equipment modifiers
(p. 345); +1 per level of High Manual
Dexterity (p. 59), or -3 per level of
Ham-Fisted (p. 138).
Lifting
HT/Average
Defaults: None.
This is the trained ability to use
your strength to its best advantage
when you lift. Roll once per lift. On a
success, increase your Basic Lift by
5% per point by which you made your
roll. This has no effect on encum-
brance, or on how much you can
carry. See Lifting and Moving Things
(p. 353).
Light Walk
DX/Hard
Defaults: None.
Prerequisites: Trained By A Master,
and both Acrobatics and Stealth at
14+.
This skill allows you to exert very
little pressure when you walk. On a
successful Light Walk roll, you leave
no visible tracks. Tracking rolls to fol-
low you automatically fail unless they
rely on something more than sight;
thus, a human tracker would be baf-
fled, but bloodhounds would suffer no
penalty at all.
You can also attempt to walk over
fragile surfaces without falling
through. Maximum Move under such
circumstances is 1/3 normal (GM’s
decision). Thin ice would require an
unmodified Light Walk roll, while rice
paper would require a roll at -8!
Finally, a successful Light Walk roll
can give a bonus to Stealth when your
intention is to move quietly. This
bonus equals half your margin of suc-
cess, rounded down. Minimum bonus
is +1.
Linguistics
IQ/Hard
Defaults: None.
This is the study of the principles
upon which languages are based. A
successful skill roll lets you identify a
language from a snatch of speech or
writing. As well, make a skill roll once
per month when learning a language
without a teacher. On a success, you
learn at full speed rather than at 1/4
speed (see Learning Languages, p. 25).
Lip Reading
Per/Average
Default: Perception-10.
This is the ability to see what others
are saying. You must be within seven
yards, or have some means of bringing
your point of view this close. A suc-
cessful skill roll lets you make out one
sentence of a discussion – assuming,
of course, that you know the language.
If your subjects suspect that you can
read lips, they can hide their mouths
or subvocalize to thwart you. A critical
failure on a Lip Reading roll – if you
are where your victims could see you –
means that you stared so much you
were noticed!
Modifiers: All Vision modifiers (see
Vision, p. 358).
Liquid Projector/TL†
DX/Easy
Default: DX-4.
This is the ability to use a weapon
that projects a stream of liquid or gas.
Roll against Liquid Projector skill to
hit your target.
Make an IQ-based Liquid Projector
roll to take immediate action (e.g.,
patch a leak), should your weapon fail.
You  must  specialize by weapon
type:
Flamethrower:  Any weapon that
projects burning  liquid or gas. (This
does  not  include plasma weapons,
which are often called “flamers”; use
Beam Weapons skill for those.)
Sprayer:  Any weapon that emits a
gas or atomized liquid (nerve gas,
sleeping gas, etc.), including an ordi-
nary spray can used as an improvised
weapon.
Squirt Gun: Any weapon that fires a
low-pressure stream of liquid at the
rate of one squirt per pull of the trigger.
Water Cannon: Any weapon that
fires a continuous jet of high-pressure
liquid, usually but not always water,
with the intent of causing knockback.
These specialties default to one
another at -4. The weapons covered by
each specialty vary by TL; e.g., Liquid
Projector (Flamethrower) covers fire-
siphons loaded with Greek fire at TL4,
while at TL6, it covers backpack tanks
that project thickened fuel.
Modifiers:  All applicable ranged
combat modifiers; -2 for heavy
weapons when you are used to
portable weapons (e.g., a flamethrow-
er mounted on a tank when you are
used to a backpack model), or for an
unfamiliar weapon of a known type; -4
or more for a weapon in bad repair.
Literature
IQ/Hard
Default: IQ-6.
This is the study of the great writ-
ings. A student of literature would be
knowledgeable in the realms of old
poetry, dusty tomes, criticism, etc.
This can be useful for finding clues to
hidden treasure, sunken lands,
Ancient Secrets, and the like. The
work in question must be available in
a language you read.
Modifiers: -5 if you’re illiterate (see
Literacy, p. 24) and relying on oral tra-
dition, save in pre-literate cultures,
where this is the norm.
SKILLS 205
Literature can be useful for finding clues to
hidden treasure, sunken lands, Ancient Secrets,
and the like.




Lockpicking/TL
IQ/Average
Default: IQ-5.
This is the ability to open locks
without the key or combination.
Each attempt requires
one minute. 
If you make the roll and open the lock,
each point by which you succeeded
shaves five seconds off the required
time. (Safecracking and similar 
challenges can take more time, at the
GM’s discretion.)
Note that if the lock has a trap or
alarm attached, you must make a sep-
arate Traps roll to circumvent it.
Modifiers:  Equipment modifiers
(p. 345); -5 if working by touch (e.g., in
total darkness). Inside information
gives a bonus at GM’s discretion. If the
GM requires a DX-based roll (for
instance, to work with a particularly
delicate mechanism), modifiers for
High Manual Dexterity (p. 59) or
Ham-Fisted (p. 138) will apply.
Machinist/TL
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5 or Mechanic (any)-5.
This is the skill of making and
modifying mechanical parts and tools.
A successful skill roll lets you build
parts from raw materials, manufac-
ture tools for use with another skill
(such as Armoury or Lockpicking), or
modify any simple mechanical device
not explicitly covered by another skill.
The GM may require an inventor to
make one or more Machinist rolls
before attempting an Engineer roll to
assemble a gadget.
Materials and component size vary
significantly with tech level. A TL5
machinist works mainly with brass
and steel components that can be seen
with the naked eye; a TL10 machinist
might work with carbon nanotubes.
Modifiers:  Equipment modifiers
(p. 345).
Main-Gauche
see Melee Weapon, p. 208
Makeup/TL
IQ/Easy
Defaults: IQ-4 or Disguise-2.
This is the skill of using theatrical
makeup to enhance a performer’s
appearance. It is not just the ability to
make someone look “pretty” – you can
make yourself or others look older,
younger, or of a different race or
nationality. At TL6+, you can use pros-
thetics to further enhance the effect.
However, you cannot make someone
look taller or shorter than he actually
is.
206 SKILLS




Market Analysis
IQ/Hard
Defaults: IQ-6, Economics-5, or
Merchant-4.
This is the skill of predicting the
short-term behavior of bond, stock,
and currency markets – usually in
order to make money! It is the main job
skill of professional traders and specu-
lators. Make a skill roll to determine
current market trends. On a critical
success, you also learn whether a trend
will continue or reverse in the future.
On a failure, you get no clear answer.
On a critical failure, you guess wrong.
Modifiers:  The Talents (p. 89) of
Business Acumen and Mathematical
Ability both provide a bonus.
Masonry
IQ/Easy
Default: IQ-4.
This is the ability to build things
out of brick or stone.
Modifiers:  Equipment modifiers
(p. 345); -3 for simple engineering
(erecting scaffolding, moving large
blocks of stone, etc.) rather than
masonry per se.
Mathematics/TL†
IQ/Hard
Defaults: IQ-6 and others.
This is the scientific study of quan-
tities and magnitudes, and their rela-
tionships and attributes, through the
use of numbers and symbols. You
must specialize:
Applied: The branch of mathematics
that interacts directly with the physical
sciences and engineering, dealing with
mathematical models of the behavior of
physical systems. Defaults: Engineer
(any)-5 or Physics-5.
Computer Science: The theoretical
study of data structures and computa-
tion. Roll vs. skill to answer questions
about what is possible with comput-
ers. This gives you no special ability to
use  computers!  Default: Computer
Programming-5.
Cryptology: The mathematical
study of codes and ciphers. This gives
you a theoretical understanding of
encryption schemes, including how
they change with TL and why 
some schemes are more effective than
others. To create or break codes, use
Cryptography skill (p. 186). Default:
Cryptography-5.
Pure:  Generic “academic” mathe-
matics. Make a skill roll to answer any
math-related question not covered by
another specialty. Pure mathematics
encompasses dozens of obscure sub-
fields that will never affect the game. If
you  must be an expert in something
like “non-selfadjoint operator alge-
bras,” you may further note an option-
al specialty (p. 169).
Statistics: The science of assem-
bling and analyzing data for the pur-
pose of calculating probabilities, con-
structing models, and making fore-
casts. Roll vs. skill to determine the
odds of a particular outcome, given
sufficient data about similar situa-
tions in the past.
Surveying:  The science of deter-
mining the area of a portion of the
Earth’s surface, the lengths and direc-
tions of the bounding lines, and the
contour of the surface. Make a skill
roll to determine the dimensions of
any area you can see. More complex
determinations require specialized
equipment. Defaults: Cartography-3 or
Navigation (any)-4.
These specialties default to one
another at -5.
Mechanic/TL†
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5, Engineer (same)-4,
or Machinist-5.
This is the ability to diagnose and
fix ordinary mechanical problems. A
successful skill roll will let you find or
repair one problem.
You must pick a specialty from
within one of these four categories:
Machine Type: Any one class of
nonvehicular machine. Types include
Micromachines (miniature machin-
ery, invisible to the naked eye; TL9+),
Nanomachines (molecular-scale
machinery; TL10+), and Robotics
(robots and automated factories;
TL7+).
Motive System Type: Any one type
of propulsion system, regardless of
vehicle type. Types include Legged,
Tracked, Wheeled, Rockets, and
Reactionless Thrusters.
Power Plant Type: Any one type 
of power plant, no matter what it 
powers. Types include Clockwork,
Steam Engine, Gasoline Engine,
Diesel Engine, Gas Turbine, Fuel Cell,
Fission Reactor, Fusion Reactor, and
Antimatter Reactor.
Vehicle Type: The controls, hull,
motive system, power plant, transmis-
sion, and even the paint job of one spe-
cific type of vehicle listed under a vehi-
cle-operation skill such as Driving
(p. 188), Piloting (p. 214), or
Submarine (p. 223).
Mechanic specialties default to one
another at -4, although the GM may
modify this for particularly close or dis-
tant specialties. The systems covered by
each specialty vary by TL. For instance,
Mechanic (Light Airplane) covers sin-
gle-engine biplanes at early TL6, small
private jets at TL7, and so forth.
Familiarity is very important here.
For instance, Mechanic/TL7 (Light
Airplane) covers both propeller-pow-
ered seaplanes and small private jets,
but going from one to the other gives
you -2 for an unfamiliar item (prop-
powered plane to jet) and -2 for an
unfamiliar implementation (seaplane
to regular plane), for a net -4 to skill
until you familiarize yourself with all
the differences.
Modifiers: -2 for an unfamiliar item
within your specialty (e.g., a barge
when you’re used to battleships), or
for an unfamiliar implementation
(e.g., a powerboat engine when you’re
used to automobile engines); equip-
ment modifiers (p. 345).
Meditation
Will/Hard
Defaults: Will-6 or Autohypnosis-4.
This is the ability to calm the emo-
tions, control the mind, and relax the
body. To use this skill, you must con-
centrate for (20 - skill) seconds, mini-
mum one second, and then roll vs.
skill. On a success, you enter a trance-
like state, which you can maintain for
hours.
A meditative trance is required for
certain rituals and is a common
preparation for prayer. In addition,
the GM may permit you to meditate
on a particular moral dilemma. On a
successful Meditation roll, the GM
will “enlighten” you, providing a hint
as to which course of action “feels”
right.
SKILLS 207




Melee Weapon
DX/Varies
Defaults: Special.
This is not one skill, but an entire
collection  of skills – one per class of
closely related melee weapons. Melee
Weapon skills are based on DX, and
default to DX-4 if Easy, DX-5 if
Average, or DX-6 if Hard. See specific
skill descriptions for other defaults.
Make a Melee Weapon roll to hit an
opponent in combat. You may also use
these skills to parry. Your Parry
defense is (skill/2) + 3, rounded down.
Melee weapons fall into broad cat-
egories on the basis of overall balance
and function. When a rule refers to
one of these categories, it applies to all
weapons in that category and all
Melee Weapon skills used to wield
them. For instance, “fencing
weapons” means “all weapons used
with any of Main-Gauche, Rapier,
Saber, or Smallsword skill.”
Fencing Weapons
Fencing weapons are light, one-
handed weapons, usually hilted
blades, optimized for parrying. If you
have a fencing weapon, you get an
improved retreating bonus when you
parry – see Retreat (p. 377).
Furthermore, you have half  the usual
penalty for parrying more than once
with the same hand (see Parrying,
p. 376).
Note that fencing weapons are light
and likely to break when used to parry
a heavier weapon. They cannot parry
flail weapons at all! You must be rela-
tively mobile to capitalize on their
speed and maneuverability: all attacks
and parries take a penalty equal to
your encumbrance level (e.g., Heavy
encumbrance gives -3 to hit or to
parry).
The skills in this category default to
one another at -3. They also default to
sword skills, as noted below.
Main-Gauche (DX/Average): Any
weapon normally wielded with Knife
or Jitte/Sai skill (see below), used in
the “off” hand. With this skill, you may
ignore the penalty for using the “off”
hand on defense (attacks are still at -4)
and the -1 for parrying with a knife. To
wield a knife as a primary weapon, use
Knife skill. Defaults: Jitte/Sai-4 or
Knife-4.
Rapier (DX/Average): Any long (over
1 yard), light thrusting sword. Default:
Broadsword-4.
Saber (DX/Average): Any light cut-
and-thrust sword. Note that cavalry
sabers are quite heavy, and use
Broadsword instead. Defaults:
Broadsword-4 or Shortsword-4.
Smallsword (DX/Average): Any
short (up to 1 yard), light thrusting
sword or one-handed short staff (such
as the sticks used in the martial arts
arnis, escrima, and  kali).  Default:
Shortsword-4.
Flails
A  flail is any flexible, unbalanced
weapon with its mass concentrated in
the head. Such a weapon cannot parry
if you have already attacked with it on
your turn. Because flails tend to wrap
around the target’s shield or weapon,
attempts to block them are at -2 and
attempts to parry them are at -4.
Fencing weapons and knives cannot
parry them at all! An unarmed fighter
can parry a flail, but at -4 in addition
to any penalty for parrying unarmed.
The skills in this category default to
one another at -3.
Flail (DX/Hard): Any one-handed
flail, such as a morningstar or nun-
chaku. Default: Axe/Mace-4.
Two-Handed Flail (DX/Hard): Any
two-handed flail. Defaults: Kusari-4 or
Two-Handed Axe/Mace-4.
Impact Weapons
An  impact weapon is any rigid,
unbalanced weapon with most of its
mass concentrated in the head. Such a
weapon cannot parry if you have
already attacked with it on your turn.
The skills in this category default to
one another at -3.
Axe/Mace (DX/Average): Any short-
or medium-length, one-handed impact
weapon, such as an axe, hatchet,
knobbed club, or pick. Default: Flail-4.
Two-Handed Axe/Mace
(DX/Average): Any long, two-handed
impact weapon, such as a baseball
bat, battleaxe, maul, or warhammer.
Defaults: Polearm-4 or Two-Handed
Flail-4.
Pole Weapons
Pole  weapons are long (usually
wooden) shafts, often adorned with
striking heads. All require two hands.
Polearm (DX/Average): Any very  long
(at least 2 yards), unbalanced pole
weapon with a heavy striking head,
including the glaive, halberd, poleaxe, and
countless others. Polearms become
unready  after an attack, but not after a
parry.  Defaults: Spear-4, Staff-4, or Two-
Handed Axe/Mace-4.
Spear (DX/Average): Any long, bal-
anced pole weapon with a thrusting
point, including spears, javelins, tri-
dents, and fixed bayonets. Defaults:
Polearm-4 or Staff-2.
Staff (DX/Average): Any long, bal-
anced pole without  a striking head.
This skill makes good use of the staff’s
extensive parrying surface when
defending, giving +2 to your Parry
score. Defaults: Polearm-4 or Spear-2.
Swords
A sword is a rigid, hilted blade with
a thrusting point, cutting edge, or both.
All swords are balanced, and can attack
and parry without becoming unready.
Broadsword (DX/Average): Any bal-
anced,  2- to 4-foot blade wielded in
one hand – broadsword, cavalry saber,
scimitar, etc. This skill also covers any
stick or club of similar size and bal-
ance to these blades, as well as bastard
swords, katanas, and longswords used
one-handed. Defaults: Force Sword-4,
Rapier-4, Saber-4, Shortsword-2, or
Two-Handed Sword-4.
Force Sword (DX/Average): Any
sword with a “blade” made of energy
instead of matter. This generally refers
to an ultra-tech weapon that projects
energy from a powered hilt, but
extends to similar effects produced
using magic or psionics. Default: any
sword skill at -3.
Jitte/Sai (DX/Average): Any tined,
one-handed sword designed to catch
rigid weapons. Jitte/Sai weapons are
built for disarming, and give +2 in the
Quick Contest to disarm an opponent
(see Knocking a Weapon Away, p. 401).
Furthermore, if you attempt to disarm
on the turn immediately  after you
parry your opponent’s weapon, you
need not roll to hit his weapon first.
Just state that you are attempting to
disarm and move directly to the Quick
Contest! This still counts as an attack.
Defaults: Force Sword-4, Main-
Gauche-4, or Shortsword-3.
Knife (DX/Easy): Any rigid, hilted
blade less than one foot long, from a
pocketknife to a bowie knife. A knife
208 SKILLS




has a very small parrying surface,
which gives you -1 to your Parry score.
Defaults: Force Sword-3, Main-
Gauche-3, or Shortsword-3.
Shortsword (DX/Average): Any  bal-
anced, one-handed weapon 1-2 feet in
length – including the shortsword and
any club of comparable size and 
balance (e.g., a police baton). 
Defaults: Broadsword-2, Force
Sword-4, Jitte/Sai-3, Knife-4, Saber-4,
Smallsword-4, or Tonfa-3.
Two-Handed Sword (DX/Average):
Any balanced, two-handed blade over 4
feet in length: greatswords, zweihan-
ders, etc. This skill also covers 
quarterstaffs wielded like swords, as
well as bastard swords, katanas, and
longswords used two-handed. Defaults:
Broadsword-4 or Force Sword-4.
Whips
A whip  is a flexible weapon made
from a length of chain, leather, wire,
etc. A whip can be up to seven yards
long – but note that a whip two yards
or more in length cannot strike at one
yard or closer, and is slow to ready
after an attack. A whip tends to wind
around its target, making it an excel-
lent disarming and entangling
weapon. However, a whip’s lack of
rigidity makes it a poor parrying
weapon. For details, see Special Melee
Weapon Rules (p. 404).
The skills in this category default to
one another at -3.
Force Whip (DX/Average): Any whip
made of pure energy instead of matter.
These are usually ultra-tech devices
that project energy from a powered
hilt, but magical or psi-tech versions
are possible. Most force whips can
lash the target but not ensnare him.
Kusari (DX/Hard): A weighted
chain wielded in two hands. Default:
Two-Handed Flail-4.
Monowire Whip (DX/Hard): A whip
made of a weighted length of
monomolecular wire attached to a
handle.
Whip (DX/Average): Any ordinary
whip.
Other Weapons
Some hand weapons defy easy
classification. For instance:
Tonfa (DX/Average): A tonfa is a
baton with a protruding handle on one
side. It can function as a baton, but
you can also grasp it by the handle and
hold it against the forearm in close
combat. This grip lets you jab for
thrust+1 crushing damage and parry
close-combat attacks at (skill/2) + 3,
rounded down. Roll vs. skill to change
grips. On a success, the grip change is
a free action. On a failure, you must
spend the entire turn changing grips. A
critical failure means you throw your
weapon away! Default: Shortsword-3.
Mental Strength
Will/Easy
Defaults: None.
Prerequisites: Trained By A Master
or Weapon Master*.
* At the GM’s option, a mage or psi
may also learn this skill.
You can actively focus your mind
to resist mental attacks. This skill
replaces Will when you resist magic
spells, psi powers, Hypnotism,
Invisibility Art, Kiai, and similar abili-
ties. Mental Strength does not replace
most normal Will rolls. Furthermore,
it does not work if you are stunned,
asleep, or unconscious – for that, buy
the Mind Shield advantage (p. 70).
Merchant
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5, Finance-6, or
Market Analysis-4.
This is the skill of buying, selling,
and trading retail and wholesale
goods. It involves bargaining, sales-
manship, and an understanding of
trade practices. It covers all types of
merchandise, but many merchants
have an optional specialty (p. 169) in a
single class of goods.
Make a skill roll to judge the value
of any piece of common goods, find
out where any commodity is bought
and sold, find the local fair market
value of any commodity, etc.
When two merchants haggle, the
GM may settle it with a Quick Contest.
The winner adds or subtracts 10% of
fair value, depending on whether he
was trying to sell or buy.
If you have this skill at any level,
you get +1 on reaction rolls when buy-
ing or selling. If you have this skill at
level 20 or better, you get +2.
Modifiers: -3 for Gullibility (p. 137);
-3 for Low Empathy (p. 142); -1 to -4 for
Shyness (p. 154). -3 for illegal goods,
unless you have Streetwise at 12+ or
specialize in such goods; -2 in an unfa-
miliar area, until you have had time to
familiarize yourself with local market
conditions; Cultural Familiarity modi-
fiers (p. 23). These last two modifiers
“stack,” and frequently occur together.
Metallurgy/TL
IQ/Hard
Defaults: Chemistry-5, Jeweler-8, or
Smith (any)-8.
This is the study of metals and
their properties. A successful roll lets
you identify metals or alloys, or solve
a problem concerning metals, their
use, mining, or refining.
Meteorology/TL†
IQ/Average
Default: IQ-5.
This is the study of the weather,
and the ability to predict it. It includes
familiarity with technological aids
such as barometers and satellite maps,
but you can still function without your
instruments. (If you can’t, you’re a
meter-reader, not a meteorologist!)
When you wish to predict the
weather, the GM rolls against your skill
in secret. On a success, he tells the
truth; on a failure, he answers ran-
domly, or lies. Each skill roll predicts
the weather for one day. If one day’s
roll fails, subsequent ones can’t suc-
ceed. For instance, a three-day forecast
would require three skill rolls: the first
for tomorrow, the second for the next
day, and the third for the day after that.
A successful roll also allows you to
deduce what sort of general climate to
expect when you visit a new area.
At TL4 or less, this skill is called
Weather Sense, and you get +2 to skill
in your home area. At TL5 and up,
Meteorology is a scientific skill, and
you must specialize by planet type; see
Planet Types (p. 180) for details.
Modifiers:  Time is a major factor!
There is no penalty to predict tomor-
row’s weather, but you have -1 for 2
days, -2 for 3 days, -4 for 4 days, -6 for
5 days, and an additional -2 per day
for each further day. Instrumentation
becomes useful with the development
of the barometer at TL4, after which
equipment modifiers (p. 345) apply.
You must know this skill at better than
default to claim bonuses for good
equipment.
SKILLS 209




Mimicry†
IQ/Hard
Defaults: IQ-6 and others.
This is the ability to imitate voices.
The Voice advantage (p. 97) gives +2 to
skill. You must specialize:
Animal Sounds: Lets you emulate a
lion’s roar, a wolf’s howl, a frog’s croak,
etc. You can only imitate animals that
have distinctive sounds. Make a skill
roll to attract animals of the type mim-
icked – or predators that normally
hunt those animals – if any are nearby.
To fool people, you must win a Quick
Contest of Mimicry vs. the listeners’
Naturalist-3 or Perception-6. Default:
Naturalist-6.
Bird Calls: Allows you to reproduce
the whistles, chirps, and other sounds
made by birds. Otherwise, this 
works as Animal Sounds. Default:
Naturalist-6.
Speech:  Enables you to imitate
vocal sounds. This does not allow you
to converse in a foreign language, but
if you have heard it, you can repro-
duce the sound of it. If you are trying
to mimic a specific person, roll at -3.
Treat this roll as a Quick Contest vs.
the IQ of anyone who knows the per-
son mimicked well. Defaults: Acting-6
or Linguistics-4.
Animal Sounds and Bird Calls
default to one another at -6. There is
no default between these specialties
and Speech.
Note that if you have the Mimicry
advantage (p. 68), there is no need to
learn this skill!
Mind Block
Will/Average
Defaults: Will-5 or Meditation-5.
This ability allows you to establish
a mental block against psionic or mag-
ical attempts to eavesdrop on your
thoughts and emotions. The tech-
niques involved are wholly mundane –
for instance, doing complicated math-
ematical calculations, or repeating
poetry over and over again. With suffi-
cient training, anyone  can learn this
skill.
To maintain a block, you must
make a Mind Block roll once per
minute. You must roll every second in
combat or other stressful situations.
If you succeed, anyone who reads
your mind must win a Quick Contest
of his mind-reading ability vs. your
Mind Block skill in order to get useful
information. Otherwise, he gets noth-
ing but poetry, multiplication tables,
etc. However, if you ever critically fail
a Mind Block roll, you thought about
precisely what the mind reader want-
ed to know – in detail – right there in
the forefront of your mind!
This skill only works against mind
reading,  not mind control or other
mental attacks. If you have a super-
natural mind shield, Mind Block acts
as a last-ditch defense: only mental
probes that pierce your magical or
psionic defenses and contact your
mind will encounter the block.
Modifiers: +2 if you do nothing but
concentrate on blocking; -3 if you are
mentally or physically stunned; -2 or
more to hide emotions  rather than
thoughts, depending on how strong
the GM rules your emotions are – it’s
hard to block your emotions while
sneaking up on your most hated
enemy!
Monowire Whip
see Melee Weapon, p. 208
Mount
DX/Average
Default: DX-5.
This is the trained ability to serve
as a mount for a rider. If your Mount
skill exceeds your rider’s Riding level,
he may use the average of the two
skills (round up) whenever he must
make a Riding roll. If you have any
points in this skill, your rider gets a
minimum +1 to skill. To throw an
unwelcome rider, win Quick Contest
of Mount vs. his Riding skill.
Musical Composition
IQ/Hard
Defaults: Musical Instrument-2, or
to Poetry-2 for song.
This is the ability to compose a
piece of music. A successful skill roll
means the piece is a pleasant listening
experience.
To compose for an ensemble or
band without  a conductor, you must
have a skill level of IQ with at least one
instrument in the composition and a
skill level of IQ-2 with the rest. Roll at
-1 per “instrument group” after the
first used in the piece; e.g., a jazz com-
position for a saxophone section,
drums, and bass would require a roll
at -2.
To compose for an orchestra or
band with a conductor requires Group
Performance (Conducting) skill
(p. 198) at IQ level. Roll at -1 per gen-
eral class of instruments after the first
used in the piece. Classes include
brass, percussion, strings, and wood-
winds. Treat choir, harp, organ, or
piano as its own class.
This skill includes the ability to
read, write, and transcribe music in
your culture’s notation system (if any).
Treat different systems – and different
musical traditions – as familiarities
(see Familiarity, p. 169).
Musical Influence
IQ/Very Hard
Defaults: None.
Prerequisites: Musical Ability 1 and
either Musical Instrument or Singing
at 12+.
This cinematic skill allows you to
influence the emotions of others by
playing a musical instrument or
singing. In some settings, this is a
magical or psionic talent, or a special
form of hypnotism, and works with
any instrument, as well as with voice.
In other settings, this skill is associat-
ed with a specific type of magical or
ultra-tech instrument.
To attempt Musical Influence, you
must first get your audience to sit and
listen to your performance. You must
also make a successful Musical
Instrument or Singing roll. You may
then roll against your Musical
Influence skill. On a success, you can
adjust the reaction roll of your audi-
ence – to you or to anyone present –
up  or down by an amount equal to
your margin of success, to a maxi-
mum of +3 (+4 for critical success).
If you have only a few seconds, or
if the audience is not paying full atten-
tion to your performance, you may
adjust reaction rolls by ±1 at most,
regardless of your margin of success.
Listeners who do not wish to be
influenced may resist with Will. Hard
of Hearing (p. 138) gives +4 to resist,
and those with Deafness (p. 129) are
completely immune. However, some
210 SKILLS




science-fiction devices generate vibra-
tions that affect the body,  in which
case a listener’s sense of hearing is
irrelevant.
It is up to the GM to determine
whether this skill works on animals as
well as sapient beings. In classic 
fantasy, it just might!
Musical Instrument†
IQ/Hard
Defaults: Special.
This is the ability to play a musical
instrument. With a successful skill
roll, you give a competent perform-
ance. You must specialize in a partic-
ular instrument. Defaults between
specialties range from -3 for similar
instruments to “no default” for utterly
unrelated ones, such as Musical
Instrument (Drums) and Musical
Instrument (Harp).
This skill includes the ability to
read music in your culture’s notation
system (if any). Treat different sys-
tems as familiarities (see Familiarity,
p. 169).
Naturalist†
IQ/Hard
Defaults: IQ-6 or Biology-3.
This skill – crucial for fantasy
druids and rangers – represents prac-
tical (as opposed to scientific) knowl-
edge of nature in its many forms. It
includes just enough Biology to tell
dangerous plants and animals from
benign ones; just enough Geology to
locate a cave to shelter in; and just
enough Meteorology to know when to
take shelter. Roll vs. skill to do any of
these things.
In settings where it is possible to
visit other worlds, you must specialize
by planet.  The specialties for planets
of the same type (see Planet Types,
p. 180) default to one another at -4.
Any larger difference results in no
default.
Navigation/TL†
IQ/Average
Defaults: Special.
This is the ability to find your
position through careful observation
of your surroundings and the use of
instrumentation. A successful roll
tells you where you are or lets you
plot a course.
You must specialize:
Sea: Navigation by the stars and
ocean currents. Modifiers:  +3 if you
have Absolute Direction (p. 34), or a
high-tech global positioning system
or inertial compass; -5 (and no use of
Astronomy default) if you lack high-
tech aids, the weather is bad, and the
stars are hidden. Defaults:
Astronomy-5 or Seamanship-5.
Air: Navigation by the stars and by
the terrain below. Modifiers are as for
Navigation (Sea). Default:
Astronomy-5.
Land: Navigation using landmarks
and the stars; also called “orienteer-
ing.”  Modifiers:  +3 if you have
Absolute Direction or a high-tech
substitute.  Defaults: IQ-5,
Cartography-4, or Mathematics
(Surveying)-4.
Space: Navigating through ordi-
nary interplanetary and interstellar
space, usually at less than the speed
of light (but some science-fiction
“warp drives” let you travel at faster-
than-light speeds in normal space).
Modifiers:  +2 for 3D Spatial Sense
(p. 34).  Defaults: Astronomy-4 or
Mathematics (Applied)-4.
Hyperspace: Also called “astroga-
tion.” Similar to Navigation (Space),
but used when traveling through
“jump space” or “hyperspace.” In set-
tings with multiple faster-than-light
drive technologies, there may be one
Navigation specialty per drive type.
Modifiers are as for Navigation
(Space).  Defaults: Astronomy-4 or
Mathematics (Applied)-4.
Air, Land, and Sea default to one
another at -2. Space and Hyperspace
default to one another at -5. There are
no defaults between these two groups.
Modifiers: -1 to -10 for being in an
unfamiliar area (GM’s discretion, but
an unfamiliar world, star system, etc.
should give at least -5); equipment
modifiers (p. 345).
NBC Suit/TL
see Environment Suit, p. 192
Net
DX/Hard
Default: Cloak-5.
This is the ability to use a net as a
thrown or melee weapon. For detailed
net rules, see Special Ranged Weapons
(p. 410).
Observation
Per/Average
Defaults: Perception-5 or
Shadowing-5.
This is the talent of observing dan-
gerous or “interesting” situations
without letting others know that you
are watching. Use this skill to moni-
tor a location, a group of people, or
your immediate surroundings for
concealed or tactically significant
details. This is not the same as gath-
ering clues or making a hands-on
search (use Forensics and Search,
respectively) – you always use
Observation from a distance.
A successful skill roll lets you
gather information that is not specif-
ically hidden. For instance, you could
case a bank for obvious cameras
before a robbery, learn the schedule
of sentries, estimate the size of a
crowd, or gauge the strength of
troops moving in the open. The GM
may require an Intelligence Analysis
roll to interpret what you observe.
To spot deliberately hidden details
– e.g., someone trying to sneak up on
you, an armed man hiding in the
crowd, or a concealed machine-gun
nest – you must win a Quick Contest
of Observation skill vs. the Stealth,
Shadowing, or Camouflage skill (as
appropriate) of the other party. The
GM should roll the Contest in secret,
and should not say, “You don’t see the
machine gun nest concealed in the
bushes.”
If your attempt fails, you get no
details on an obvious item, or fail to
spot a hidden one. On a critical fail-
ure, someone spots you  and reacts
poorly to the attention . . .
Modifiers: Acute Senses (p. 35), as
appropriate; modifiers for cover,
darkness, or size; -1 to -10 if the tar-
get is concealed by high-tech camou-
flage or “stealth” technology; +1 to
+10 if you possess suitable surveil-
lance devices (a thermograph to spot
a concealed sniper, binoculars to
observe troop movements, etc.) and
succeed at the skill roll to operate
them.
SKILLS 211




Occultism
IQ/Average
Default: IQ-5.
This is the study of the mysterious
and the supernatural. An occultist is
an expert on ancient rituals, haunt-
ings, mysticism, primitive magical
beliefs, psychic phenomena, etc. Note
that an occultist does not have to
believe in the material he studies!
In worlds where everyone knows
that paranormal powers exist,
Occultism covers lore about these
powers and their users. A good roll
might provide insights into phenome-
na that aren’t related to known pow-
ers. However, Occultism provides no
details on how talented individuals
invoke their powers. For instance, a
fantasy occultist would know what
magic can accomplish, and could pro-
vide advice on slaying demons, but
without Thaumatology skill (p. 225),
he could not explain the gestures,
words, and symbols used by wizards.
In campaigns where many super-
natural forces coexist, the GM may
require occultists to specialize in such
fields as Demonology (the study of
demons, possession, and pacts),
Pneumatology (the study of spirits),
and Vampirology (the study of 
vampires).
Packing
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5 or Animal Handling
(Equines)-5.
This is the ability to get loads on
and off of pack animals quickly and
efficiently. It also lets you get the best
performance from pack animals on
the road, judge such beasts before
purchase, and select the best route for
a pack train. If the beasts are ornery
or badly trained (GM’s judgment), you
must make a successful Animal
Handling roll before you can attempt
a Packing roll. A caravan without at
least one master packer (Packing at
15+) moves at 80% its normal speed.
Paleontology/TL†
IQ/Hard
Defaults: Biology-4 and others.
This is the science of fossil study.
Make a skill roll to recognize fossils or
to deduce an organism’s habitat,
structure, etc. from fossil evidence. A
successful roll – with equipment 
modifiers (p. 345) for lab facilities –
identifies the approximate age of a
fossil.
You must specialize:
Micropaleontology: The study of
fossils too small to be seen with the
naked eye. This skill requires a lab.
Paleoanthropology: The study of
human fossils and tools, and the rela-
tion of primitive tribes to their habi-
tats. Also defaults to Anthropology-2.
Paleobotany: The study of vegetable
fossils.
Paleozoology:  The study of prehis-
toric animals from fossilized bones,
food, feces, footprints, etc.
These specialties default to one
another at -2.
Panhandling
IQ/Easy
Defaults: IQ-4, Fast Talk-2, or
Public Speaking-3.
This is the art of effective begging:
who to approach, how to approach
them, and how to avoid legal entan-
glements. Roll once per hour of beg-
ging.
On a success, you net $2.00 times
your margin of success. On a critical
success, you get some sort of unex-
pected bonus – perhaps someone buys
you dinner or gives you a useful or
saleable item (e.g., a raincoat or a new
pair of shoes). On a failure, you
receive nothing. On a critical failure,
you are assaulted or have a run-in
with the law.
Modifiers: Any bonus for Charisma
(p. 41); +3 for Pitiable (p. 22); -1 to -4
for Shyness (p. 154). You may, if you
wish, apply the opposite of your usual
appearance modifier – that is, a penal-
ty for being attractive or a bonus for
being unattractive – unless you are
Horrific or Monstrous (p. 21). The GM
may assign a bonus if there is a lot of
foot traffic in the area, or a penalty if
there is no one around.
Parachuting/TL
DX/Easy
Default: DX-4.
This is the ability to survive a para-
chute jump. Roll once per jump.
Failure could mean anything from
drifting off course to panic that makes
you drop your gear (GM’s option). A
critical failure means the chute did
not open or was fatally fouled (see
Falling, p. 431). For a jump under bad
conditions, make a second roll on
landing – for instance, to survive an
“ankle-breaker” landing without
injury, or to dodge trees on the way
down. Make an IQ-based roll to pack a
parachute.
Modifiers: -2 if your body weight
plus encumbrance exceeds your Basic
Lift¥10.
Parry Missile Weapons
DX/Hard
Defaults: None.
This skill lets you parry thrown or
missile weapons with a ready melee
weapon. If you are wearing wrist-
bands or gloves with DR 2+, or have at
least this much natural DR, you can
also parry with your hands. Your
Parry score is (skill/2) + 3, rounded
down – but based on Parry Missile
Weapons skill, not  your Melee
Weapon or unarmed combat skill.
Modifiers (to Parry): +4 to parry
large thrown weapons (e.g., axes and
spears); +2 to parry small thrown
weapons (e.g., knives and shuriken);
no modifier to parry arrows; -2 to
parry smaller low-tech missiles (e.g.,
crossbow bolts and blowpipe darts).
You cannot parry bullets or similar
high-tech projectiles! (Exception:
Enhanced Time Sense allows you to
parry bullets at -5.)
Performance
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5, Acting-2, or Public
Speaking-2.
212 SKILLS
Note that an occultist does not have to believe
in the material he studies!




This is the ability to act on the
stage or screen. It is different from
Acting in that you are trying to
impress and entertain people – not
deceive them. If you studied this skill
formally, it includes the knowledge
expected of a professional actor from
your culture and tech level (stage
directions, actor-agent-producer 
relations, etc.).
Modifiers: +2 for Voice (p. 97); -1 to
-4 for Shyness (p. 154); -2 for
Stuttering (p. 157).
Persuade
see Enthrallment, p. 191
Pharmacy/TL†
IQ/Hard
Defaults: IQ-6 and others.
This is the skill of preparing medi-
cines to treat illness. (To work with
noxious  drugs, use Poisons skill,
p. 214.) You must specialize:
Herbal:  The ability to make and
administer remedies prepared from
plants. Make a Naturalist roll to locate
herbs. Before TL5, this is the only spe-
cialty available. It replaces Physician
(below) and is frequently used in con-
junction with Esoteric Medicine
(p. 192). At TL5+, this specialty
remains available, but Pharmacy
(Synthetic) is much more common.
Prerequisite: Naturalist.  Defaults:
Biology-5, Herb Lore-5, or
Naturalist-5.
Synthetic:  The skill of preparing
drugs under “laboratory” conditions.
To  prescribe drugs, use Physician skill.
This specialty is only available at
TL5+.  Defaults: Chemistry-5 or
Physician-5.
Philosophy†
IQ/Hard
Default: IQ-6.
This is the study of a system of
principles to live by. You must special-
ize in a particular school of philoso-
phy; e.g., Confucianism, Marxism, or
Stoicism. (If you study a religious phi-
losophy, buy Theology skill, p. 226.)
When confronted with someone who
subscribes to this philosophy, a suc-
cessful Philosophy roll might provide
insights into his behavior.
You do not necessarily believe in
the ideals of the philosophy you study.
If you do, you may ask the GM to
make a secret roll against your
Philosophy skill when you are faced
with a moral dilemma. On a success,
the GM will “enlighten” you and pro-
vide a hint as to which course of
action “feels” right given your beliefs.
Photography/TL
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5 or Electronics
Operation (Media)-5.
This is the ability to use a camera
competently, use a darkroom (TL5+)
or digital imaging software (TL8+),
etc., and to produce recognizable and
attractive photos. You may roll at
default to use a camera, but not to
develop film or prints in a darkroom.
Modifiers: -3 for an unfamiliar cam-
era; -3 for a motion-picture camera.
Physician/TL
IQ/Hard
Defaults: IQ-7, First Aid-11, or
Veterinary-5.
This is the ability to aid the sick
and the injured, prescribe drugs and
care, etc. Make a skill roll to hasten
natural recovery from injury (see
Recovery, p. 423), and whenever the
GM requires a roll to test general med-
ical competence or knowledge. Apply
physiology modifiers (p. 181) if your
patient is of a different species from
you.
At TL4 and below, this skill does not
exist  in most game worlds. Instead,
use Esoteric Medicine (p. 192),
Pharmacy (Herbal) (above), or both.
At TL5+, medical knowledge is
divided between Pharmacy
(Synthetic) and Physician. A physician
knows a great deal about drugs. He
can identify most drugs fairly easily
(at -5 without laboratory facilities but
+3 if he takes the risk of smelling/tast-
ing the substance), but he cannot for-
mulate  them unless he also learns
Pharmacy.
Physics/TL
IQ/Very Hard
Default: IQ-6.
Prerequisite: Mathematics (Applied)
at TL5+.
This is the science dealing with the
properties and interactions of matter
and energy. Beyond the basics (such
as the behavior of moving bodies), a
physicist’s knowledge includes what-
ever is understood about electricity,
gravity, heat, light, magnetism, radia-
tion, and sound at his tech level.
At TL6+, most physicists have an
optional  specialty (p. 169): acoustics,
astrophysics, geophysics, nuclear
physics, optics, particle physics, quan-
tum physics, relativity, solid-state
physics, etc. Some settings offer exotic
options, such as hyperspace physics
(the science of hyperspace and jump
points), parachronic physics (the
study of other realities and timelines),
paraphysics (the physics of psi phe-
nomena), probability physics (the
study of probability manipulation),
and temporal physics (the science of
time travel).
Physiology/TL†
IQ/Hard
Defaults: IQ-6, Diagnosis-5,
Physician-5, or Surgery-5.
This is the study of the human
body and its function. A physiologist
knows how bones, muscles, and
organs work, and where they are
located. In settings with multiple sapi-
ent species, you must  specialize by
race. Defaults between species (if any)
are up to the GM.
Pickpocket
DX/Hard
Defaults: DX-6, Filch-5, or Sleight
of Hand-4.
This is the ability to steal a purse,
knife, etc., from someone’s person – or
to “plant” something on him.
If your victim is aware someone
may try to pick his pocket, or if he is
generally wary, you must win a Quick
Contest of Pickpocket vs. the higher of
his Perception or Streetwise skill. To
outwit a third party who is watching
you and the victim, you must win a
Quick Contest of Pickpocket vs. the
watcher’s Observation skill.
Modifiers:  +5 if the victim is dis-
tracted; +10 if he is asleep or drunk;
up to -5 for goods in an inner pocket;
and up to -10 for a ring or similar 
jewelry.
SKILLS 213




Piloting/TL†
DX/Average
Default: IQ-6.
This is the ability to operate a spe-
cific type of aircraft or spacecraft. The
default is to IQ, because it takes intel-
ligence to figure out the controls in an
emergency, but when you learn  this
skill, always base it on DX.
Roll against Piloting for takeoffs
and landings, and in any hazardous
situation. Failure by 1 indicates a
rough job; failure by more indicates
damage to the vehicle. A critical failure
is a crash! If you have skill 15+, a criti-
cal failure requires an immediate sec-
ond roll. Only if the second roll is a fail-
ure does a mishap occur. Otherwise, it
was a “near thing,” averted by experi-
ence. Air combat requires frequent
Piloting rolls as well.
Make an IQ-based Piloting roll for
basic map reading or practical mete-
orology, or to recall aviation laws and
regulations.
Remotely piloted vehicles (RPVs)
use this skill if the pilot uses some
form of telepresence to mimic actual-
ly being in the cockpit. Otherwise,
make a DX-based roll against the
appropriate skill for the task the RPV
is performing (e.g., Forward Observer
for a surveillance drone).
You must specialize:
Aerospace:  Any vehicle capable of
atmospheric flight to and from orbit.
Defaults: High-Performance Airplane-
2 or other Piloting at -4.
Autogyro: Any rotor-equipped air-
craft that uses its rotors for lift but not
thrust.  Defaults: Helicopter-3, any
Airplane specialty at -4, or other
Piloting at -5.
Contragravity:  Any aircraft that
relies on ultra-tech or magical levita-
tion.  Defaults: Vertol-3 or other
Piloting at -5.
Flight Pack: Any “strap-on” aircraft.
Defaults: Vertol-4 or other Piloting at
-5.
Glider:  Any kind of unpowered,
winged aircraft. Defaults: Light
Airplane or Ultralight at -2, or other
Piloting at -4.
Heavy Airplane: Any winged air-
craft weighing over 10 tons and flying
at 600 mph or slower. Defaults: High-
Performance Airplane or Light
Airplane at -2, or other Piloting at -4.
Helicopter: Any aircraft that uses
rotors for both lift and thrust.
Defaults: Autogyro-2, Vertol-4, or
other Piloting at -5.
High-Performance Airplane: Any
winged aircraft capable of flying faster
than 600 mph. Defaults: Aerospace,
Heavy Airplane, or Light Airplane at
-2, or other Piloting at -4.
High-Performance Spacecraft: Any
space vehicle capable of accelerations
of 0.1G or more. Defaults: Aerospace-4
or Low-Performance Spacecraft-2.
Light Airplane: Any winged aircraft
weighing 10 tons or less and flying at
600 mph or slower. Defaults: Glider,
Heavy Airplane, High-Performance
Airplane, or Ultralight at -2, or other
Piloting at -4.
Lighter-Than-Air:  Any kind of air-
ship or balloon. Default: other Piloting
at -5.
Lightsail: Any spacecraft that uses a
lightsail, regardless of thrust. Default:
Low-Performance Spacecraft-4.
Low-G Wings: Muscle-powered
strap-on wings used in a low-gravity
environment with an atmosphere.
Learn Flight (p. 195) for endurance
flying. Default: Glider-4.
Low-Performance Spacecraft: Any
space vehicle that accelerates at less
than 0.1G. Defaults: Aerospace-4 or
High-Performance Spacecraft-2.
Ultralight: Any winged aircraft
weighing 0.5 tons or less and flying at
200 mph or slower. Defaults: Glider or
Light Airplane at -2, other Airplane
specialties at -4, or other Piloting at -5.
Vertol:  Any aircraft that flies by
brute-force application of thrust
rather than by using rotors or wings.
Defaults: Contragravity-3, Helicopter-
4, or other Piloting at -5.
Modifiers: +1 for 3D Spatial Sense
(p. 34); +1 for Perfect Balance (p. 74).
-2 for an unfamiliar vehicle within
your specialty (e.g., a twin-engine
plane when you are used to single-
engine craft); -2 or more for unusually
primitive  or extremely complex con-
trols; -4 or more for a plane in bad
repair; -2 or more for bad flying 
conditions.
Poetry
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5 or Writing-5.
This is the ability to compose
“good” poetry of any type native to
your culture, in any language you
know. A successful roll lets you write
one good poem in an appropriate
amount of time (GM’s decision). 
A failed roll might mean that you
couldn’t get inspired – or that your
audience just didn’t care for your work
(for whatever reason).
Modifiers:  The time modifiers
under  Time Spent (p. 346) will often
apply; Cultural Familiarity modifiers
(p. 23); Language modifiers (p. 23).
Poisons/TL
IQ/Hard
Defaults: IQ-6, Chemistry-5,
Pharmacy (any)-3, or Physician-3.
214 SKILLS




This skill represents practical
knowledge of poisons. A successful
skill roll lets you (among other things)
recognize a poison-bearing plant in
the wild; extract the poison in a useful
form; recognize a poison by its taste in
food or drink; identify a poison by
observing its effects (+3 if you are poi-
soned); know a proper antidote; or
recognize or prepare the antidote
from its sources. Each of these feats
requires a separate roll.
Modifiers:  Acute Taste and Smell
(p. 35) gives a bonus to notice or rec-
ognize a poison by taste or by scent.
Likewise, Discriminatory Smell and
Discriminatory Taste (p. 49) give +4 to
these tasks when working by smell or
by taste, respectively.
Polearm
see Melee Weapon, p. 208
Politics
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5 or Diplomacy-5.
This is the ability to get into office
and get along with other politicians. It
has nothing to do with administra-
tion! You can only learn Politics in
office or by working for someone in
office. A successful skill roll will give
you +2 on reactions from fellow
politicians. The GM may opt to han-
dle an election as a Quick Contest of
Politics.
Modifiers:  +2 for Voice (p. 97); -3
for Low Empathy (p. 142); -1 to -4 
for Shyness (p. 154). In some jurisdic-
tions, money is another important
modifier . . .
Power Blow
Will/Hard
Defaults: None.
Prerequisites: Trained By A Master
or Weapon Master.
This is the ability to draw on your
inner strength to deliver a devastating
blow in melee combat. Roll once per
attack. Power Blow costs 1 FP per
attempt, successful or not.
If successful, double your ST for
damage purposes for the next attack
only. This attack takes all normal mod-
ifiers, and must occur immediately
after the Power Blow roll. If you know
Power Blow at better than skill 20, you
can  triple  your ST by accepting an
extra -10 to the skill roll.
You can also use this skill in non-
combat situations. For instance, you
could use Power Blow to double or
triple your ST momentarily in order to
move a heavy object. Such feats cost 1
FP and require a skill roll, as described
above.
Modifiers: -10 if used instantly,
dropping to -5 after 1 turn of concen-
tration, -4 after 2 turns, -3 after 4
turns, -2 after 8 turns, -1 after 16
turns, and no penalty after 32 turns.
Pressure Points
IQ/Hard
Defaults: None*.
Prerequisites: Trained By A Master
or Weapon Master.
* May default to Esoteric
Medicine-4 in a cinematic campaign.
This is the art of striking pressure
points in order to disable an oppo-
nent. To use this ability, you must
make a successful attack with Karate
(or other appropriate combat skill; see
below). This attack is at -2 in addition
to any hit location modifier (see Hit
Location, p. 398). If at least one point
of damage penetrates the target’s DR,
roll a Quick Contest of Pressure Points
vs. the victim’s HT.
If you win, you temporarily disable
your target. A limb is paralyzed and
effectively crippled for 5d seconds. A
hit to a torso pressure point interferes
with the victim’s breathing, resulting
in suffocation (see Suffocation,
p. 436); he may roll against HT every
second to recover. A hit to the face
stuns the victim; he gets an IQ roll
every second to recover. A blow to the
skull blinds the victim for 2d seconds;
see Blindness (p. 124).
You can also use Pressure Points
with Judo. Roll the Quick Contest
described above after successfully
applying a lock. This is in addition to
any other effects of the lock.
The GM may permit warriors to
learn specialties of this skill for use
with crushing weapons. Examples
include Pressure Points (Bow) for use
with blunt arrows, Pressure Points
(Shortsword) for use with a baton,
and Pressure Points (Staff) for use
with a staff.
Modifiers:  Physiology modifiers
(p. 181).
Pressure Secrets
IQ/Very Hard
Defaults: None.
Prerequisites: Trained By A Master
and Pressure Points at 16+.
This skill represents knowledge of
the most vulnerable vital points of the
human body. It allows you to maim
and kill by crushing and tearing vital
organs and nerve clusters with deadly
precision.
To use this ability, you must make a
successful unarmed attack. This
attack is at -2 in addition to any hit
location modifier (see Hit Location,
p. 398). If you hit, make a Pressure
Secrets roll.
On a success, any damage that pen-
etrates DR is doubled – or tripled if you
targeted the vital organs. In effect,
your hands and feet have become
impaling weapons!
You can also use this ability with
locks and similar grappling attacks.
This represents knowledge of exactly
where to apply pressure to tear or
sprain joints and ligaments. After
applying the lock, make a Pressure
Secrets roll. On a success, double the
damage, shock, or harmful effects of
the lock for that turn.
This skill is unrealistic and poten-
tially unbalancing. The GM should
carefully weigh its impact before
allowing it, and may wish to make it
very difficult for PCs to learn – or even
restrict it to deadly NPC opponents.
Modifiers: Physiology modifiers
(p. 181).
Professional Skill
DX or IQ/Average
Defaults: Special.
Many realistic job skills are more
useful for making a living than for
adventuring. Most such skills do not
appear in this skill list – but you can
still learn them if you want! Each is a
separate Professional Skill. If your
“adventuring” skills aren’t useful for
earning money, a Professional Skill
can help you earn a steady income. To
qualify for most jobs, you will need 
the relevant Professional Skill at 
12+ (unless you are supposed  to be
incompetent!).
SKILLS 215




Most professions encompass a
body of knowledge. The associated
Professional Skills are IQ/Average and
default to IQ-5, because the smarter
you are, the better you can recall and
employ the techniques used at your
job. Examples include air traffic con-
troller, barber, brewer, cooper, distiller,
dyer, florist, game designer, journalist,
prostitute, tanner, vintner, and
zookeeper.
A few professions – glassblower,
tailor, weaver, etc. – focus more on
precision than on recall. These
Professional Skills are DX/Average
and default to DX-5.
At the GM’s option, a given
Professional Skill might also default to
other skills. For instance, “Journalist”
would logically default to Writing-3.
The skills associated with highly
paid or respected professions often
have prerequisites. For instance, “Air
Traffic Controller” might require
Electronics Operation (Sensors) skill.
Like defaults, prerequisites are up to
the GM.
You are free to create your own
Professional Skills, subject to GM
approval. They should be unique and
well defined, not just a compilation of
existing skills. For example:
Bartender
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5 or Carousing-3.
This is the skill of maintaining a
professional-quality bar and interact-
ing with customers in a professional
yet friendly way. A successful skill roll
lets you mix drinks, recall local laws
regarding alcohol, gauge the intoxica-
tion level of a customer, or calm an
unruly drunk before the bouncer
needs to get involved. At higher levels,
this skill takes on an element of show-
manship, allowing you to present
drinks in unique and attractive ways,
and to mix them with showy tricks
and flourishes.
Propaganda/TL
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5, Merchant-5, or
Psychology-4.
This is the skill of indirect persua-
sion through the media. It is used for
psychological warfare by intelligence
and military organizations, and 
for advertising and marketing in the
civilian world. Use familiarity (p. 169)
to reflect the differences between
these areas.
Propaganda works on groups, not
individuals. The GM should set the
effective Will of the target group based
on its size, composition, and resist-
ance to the desired outcome, and then
use the Influence Rolls (p. 359) rules to
determine the results. Success might
inform the target audience or even
alter its perceptions. Propaganda
attempts nearly always take more time
and exposure than ordinary Influence
rolls, however; how much time is up
to the GM.
Prospecting/TL
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5 or Geology (any)-4.
This is the skill of finding valuable
minerals. A successful Prospecting roll
lets you locate minerals, judge good
ore from a small sample (and gauge its
commercial value), and find water by
using an “eye for country,” as
described for Survival skill (p. 223).
This skill is “applied geology,” and
requires  on-site examination.
Prospecting from a distance – using
maps, instrument readings, and
extrapolation – uses Geology skill
instead.
Modifiers: Equipment modifiers
(p. 345); -1 in a new area of a familiar
type, or -2 or more in an unfamiliar
type of area, until you have been there
for at least a month.
Psychology
IQ/Hard
Defaults: IQ-6 or Sociology-4.
This is the skill of applied psycholo-
gy, which may be learned by academic
study or lengthy observation of human
nature. Roll against skill to predict the
general behavior of an individual or
small group in a particular situation –
especially a stressful situation.
In settings with multiple sapient
species, you must specialize by race.
Defaults between specialties are up to
the GM.
If the GM desires extra detail, he
may rule that Psychology is split into
two specialties: Applied (described
above) and Experimental (for 
scientists who run rats in mazes and
so forth). Applied defaults to
Experimental-5; Experimental does
not default to Applied, as a shrewd
observer of people may lack training
in scientific procedures.
Modifiers: +3 if you know the sub-
ject well; +3 if the subject is of a
known deviant personality type; +1 for
Sensitive or +3 for Empathy (p. 51), or
-3 for Low Empathy (p. 142), if diag-
nosing a subject in your presence; -3
for Callous (p. 125), unless specifically
rolling to deduce someone’s weak-
nesses so you can exploit them.
Public Speaking
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5, Acting-5,
Performance-2, or Politics-5.
This is general talent with the spo-
ken word. A successful skill roll lets
you (for instance) give a good political
speech, entertain a group around a
campfire, incite or calm a riot, or put
on a successful “court jester” act.
Public Speaking includes skill with
debate, oratory, and rhetoric, as well
as ability with less formal activities
such as “punning” and storytelling.
Not all speakers possess talent in all of
these areas. You may take an optional
specialty (p. 169) to represent this.
Modifiers: Any bonus for Charisma
(p. 41); +2 for Voice (p. 97); -1 to -4 for
Shyness (p. 154); -2 for Stuttering
(p. 157); Cultural Familiarity modi-
fiers (p. 23); Language modifiers
(p. 24).
Push
DX/Hard
Defaults: None.
Prerequisite: Trained By A Master.
This skill allows you to channel
your  chi  in order to “gently” push
away an adversary or cause him to
lose his balance. Roll against Push
skill to hit. This counts as a barehand-
ed attack (see Shove, p. 372), and your
target may attempt any legal active
defense.
If you hit, use the higher of your ST
or your Push skill as your effective ST.
Roll  swing damage for that ST, and
double the result. For instance, if you
had ST 10 and Push-15, you would roll
swing damage for ST 15 (2d+1), and
double it. This damage inflicts knock-
back (see Knockback, p. 378) but never
actual physical injury.
216 SKILLS




Rapier
see Melee Weapon, p. 208
Religious Ritual†
IQ/Hard
Defaults: Ritual Magic (same)-6 or
Theology (same)-4.
This is the ability to perform reli-
gious rites – masses, funerals, wed-
dings, etc. – before a congregation.
You  must specialize by religion. This
skill includes detailed knowledge of
the ritual motions, prayers, and trap-
pings of the faith, as well as the ability
to capture and hold the attention of
worshipers. For religions that practice
sacrifice, Religious Ritual also covers
familiarity with sacrificial tools and
methods.
To be a priest or holy man at TL1+,
you must have both Religious Ritual
and Theology skill (p. 226) for your
religion. TL0 shamans need only learn
Religious Ritual.
In worlds where priests can per-
form miracles, each magical  ritual or
spell is a separate skill, but certain
“mundane” religious rituals – such as
sacrifice – can give bonuses to spell
rolls. You must always make a suc-
cessful Religious Ritual roll to claim
such a bonus. In other settings, a
priest’s magic is only as good as his rit-
ual. If this is the case, your roll to work
magic is against the lower of Religious
Ritual and your actual spell skill.
Research/TL
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5 or Writing-3.
Prerequisite: literacy in at least one
language (see p. 24)*.
* At TL8+, Computer Operation is
also a prerequisite.
This is the ability to do library and
file research. Roll against skill to find
a useful piece of data in an appropri-
ate place of research . . . if the infor-
mation is there to be found.
At the GM’s option, when research-
ing material connected with a “book-
learned” skill such as Forensics,
Literature, or Physics, you may roll
against that skill at -2 instead, if that
would be better than your Research
skill or default (but this is not  a 
general default level).
Modifiers:  Language modifiers
(p. 24), for research materials in a for-
eign tongue.
Riding†
DX/Average
Defaults: DX-5 or Animal Handling
(same)-3.
This is the ability to ride a particu-
lar kind of mount. Make a skill roll
when you first try to mount a riding
animal, and again each time some-
thing happens to frighten or challenge
the creature (e.g., a jump).
You  must  specialize by riding
beast. Defaults between specialties
vary from 0 to -10. For instance, if you
have Riding (Horse), Riding (Mule) is
essentially the same skill (no default
penalty), Riding (Camel) would
default at -3, Riding (Dolphin) at -6,
and Riding (Dragon) at a whopping
-10!
Modifiers:  +5 if the animal knows
and likes you; +1 or more for a mount
with the Mount skill (p. 210); -10 if the
animal has not been trained for riding.
SKILLS 217




Ritual Magic†
IQ/Very Hard
Default: Religious Ritual (same)-6.
This skill gives an understanding of
the intellectual and mystical processes
involved in the rituals of a particular
tradition of spirit invocation. Make a
skill roll to determine the purpose of a
ritual conducted in your presence, the
type of entity being summoned, etc.
You  must specialize by tradition;
e.g., Voodoo or Witchcraft. Specialties
default to one another at -5. The
processes involved are comparable,
but the specific rituals and spirits dif-
fer significantly.
In worlds with working ritual
magic, Ritual Magic skill is the pri-
mary skill of sorcerers. All rituals of
power default to it! See the appropri-
ate worldbook for details.
This is the skill of invoking spirits
to produce magical effects for nonreli-
gious reasons. The equivalent skill for
the more direct, flashy magic of fanta-
sy is Thaumatology (p. 225); knowl-
edge of religious rites associated with a
tradition is Religious Ritual (p. 217).
Running
HT/Average
Default: HT-5.
This skill represents training in
both sprints and long-distance run-
ning. Roll against the higher of
Running or HT to avoid fatigue or
injury due to running. When racing
someone of equal Move on foot, roll a
Quick Contest of Running skill to
determine the winner.
Note that you must have legs and
be capable of land movement to learn
this skill.
Saber
see Melee Weapon, p. 208
Savoir-Faire†
IQ/Easy
Defaults: IQ-4 and others.
This is the skill of appropriate
behavior in a subculture that has an
established code of conduct – for
instance, high society or the military.
When dealing with that social group, a
successful skill roll lets you interact
without embarrassing yourself, detect
pretenders to high standing, and so
on. You may also substitute an
Influence roll against Savoir-Faire for
any reaction roll required in a social
situation involving that subculture;
see  Influence Rolls (p. 359). Roll 
once per encounter.
You must specialize. Common spe-
cialties include:
Dojo:  How to greet masters, wear
weapons, and issue challenges at a
karate  dojo,  kung fu kwoon, fencing
salle, or similar academy of the mar-
tial arts. Recognized  skill determines
relative standing. In certain places and
times, to flout tradition is to risk vio-
lent retribution! For competitive mar-
tial arts (only), this skill defaults to any
relevant Games skill at -3.
High Society: The manners of those
of “good” birth and breeding. Status
determines relative standing. Roll
against skill whenever you must
impersonate someone more than
three Status levels away from your
own. If your Status is negative and
you are trying to pass yourself off as
someone of Status 1+, or vice versa,
this roll is at -2.
Mafia: Proper conduct within a for-
mal criminal organization. This
includes such things as codes of
silence and showing proper deference
to “made men.” These protocols often
ape those of high society . . . but the
penalties for misconduct are far more
severe. Default: Streetwise-3.
Military: The customs, traditions,
and regulations of military service.
This also includes knowledge of the
unwritten rules: what is acceptable
even if not regulation, and what is for-
bidden although there is nothing in
writing against it. Military Rank
determines relative standing.
Police: As Savoir-Faire (Military),
but for civilian police service. This
gives knowledge of the social proto-
cols for police officers; use Law
(Police) for the legal protocols. Police
Rank determines relative standing.
Servant: Knowledge of how to
serve the upper class. Certain proce-
dures are always done just so (the
salad fork goes outside the dinner
fork, the Duke is announced before
the Earl, etc.), and certain attitudes in
a servant are unacceptable.
Savoir-Faire (High Society) is the
most common specialty, and you may
list this as simply “Savoir-Faire” on
your character sheet. Savoir Faire
(High Society) and (Servant) default
to one another at -2. There are no
defaults between other types of
Savoir-Faire.
Modifiers:  Cultural Familiarity
modifiers (p. 23). +2 if you are of high-
er standing than those you are trying
to impress, or -2 if you are of lower
standing (“standing” might mean
Rank, Status, skill level, or something
else). +2 if you seem to have important
friends. -4 for Clueless (p. 126); -3 for
Low Empathy (p. 142); -1 for Oblivious
(p. 146); -1 to -4 for Shyness (p. 154).
Scrounging
Per/Easy
Default: Perception-4.
218 SKILLS




This is the ability to find, salvage,
or improvise useful items that others
can’t locate. Each attempt takes an
hour. You do not necessarily steal your
booty; you just locate it – somehow –
and then acquire it by any means nec-
essary. Note that if you find something
that is “nailed down,” you must decide
how to try to get it (which might
require a roll on another skill).
Modifiers:  As the GM sees fit, for
the rarity of the item sought.
Scuba/TL
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5 or Diving Suit-2.
Prerequisite: Swimming.
This is the ability to use self-con-
tained underwater breathing appara-
tus (scuba). Roll when you first enter
the water, and again every 30 minutes
thereafter, to avoid inhaling water
(treat as drowning; see Suffocation,
p. 436). If you know this skill above
default level, a successful roll also lets
you spot problems with the equipment
before you put it on.
Modifiers: -2 to -4 for unfamiliar
scuba rigs; e.g., closed-circuit gear
when you’re used to open-circuit.
Seamanship/TL
see Crewman, p. 185
Search
Per/Average
Defaults: Perception-5 or
Criminology-5.
This is the ability to search people,
baggage, and vehicles for items that
aren’t in plain sight. The GM rolls
once – in secret – per item of interest.
For  deliberately concealed items, this
is a Quick Contest of your Search skill
vs. the Holdout or Smuggling skill
used to hide the item. If you fail, the
GM simply says, “You found noth-
ing.” (It defeats the purpose to say,
“You don’t find the gun under his
jacket.”)
If more than one person is search-
ing, roll separately for each searcher.
The GM should avoid unnecessary
rolls. For instance, no human can get
a sawed-off shotgun through a body
search. Likewise, a knife or jewel sim-
ply cannot be found on a normally
dressed person without an X-ray or
skin search. In general, if the net
bonus to the concealer’s Holdout roll
is +3 or more, a skin search is required.
If his Holdout is at -2 or worse for size,
a skin search will automatically find
the hidden item.
Modifiers:  +1 for a “pat-down” of
an unresisting person (takes one
minute), +3 for a thorough “skin
search” of a person’s hair and clothing
(takes three minutes), or +5 for a com-
plete search, including body cavities
(takes five minutes). Bonuses for
Acute Touch (p. 35) and Sensitive
Touch (p. 83) apply to all  hands-on
searches. On a successful Electronics
Operation (Security) roll, specialized
sensors – metal detectors, X-ray
machines, etc. – give from +1 to +5 to
find items they can detect (a metal
detector won’t help you find plastic
explosives!).
Sewing/TL
DX/Easy
Default: DX-4.
This is the ability to work with
fabric using the tools of your tech
level. A successful skill roll lets you
repair damaged clothing (or any
other item made of cloth), modify
garments (useful when you must
wear another person’s clothing, per-
haps to impersonate him), or create
new clothing or costumes from suit-
able materials.
Make an IQ-based roll to design
clothing, at +1 if you have Fashion
Sense (p. 21).
Before TL7, someone knows this
skill in almost every household. At
TL7+, it is rare for anyone but a pro-
fessional seamstress or tailor to know
Sewing – most people work at default
(at +4 for a simple task like reattach-
ing a button) and discard items that
they cannot mend.
Modifiers:  Equipment modifiers
(p. 345); modifiers for High Manual
Dexterity (p. 59) or Ham-Fisted
(p. 138).
Sex Appeal
HT/Average
Default: HT-3.
This is the ability to impress those
who are attracted to members of your
sex. It has as much to do with attitude
as it does with looks. If you are not
willing to “vamp” someone to get what
you want, you won’t have this skill – or
want it.
You may substitute an Influence
roll against Sex Appeal for any reac-
tion roll made by someone who is
attracted to members of your sex; see
Influence Rolls (p. 359).
Usually, you may make only one
attempt per “target,” although the GM
might allow another attempt after a
few weeks.
Modifiers: +2 for Voice (p. 97); -3 for
Low Empathy (p. 142); -1 for Oblivious
(p. 146); -1 to -4 for Shyness (p. 154); -2
for Stuttering (p. 157). Apply any
bonus for above-average appearance
(p. 21) – or double the penalty for
below-average appearance!
Shadowing
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5, Observation-5, or
Stealth-4 (on foot only).
This is the ability to follow anoth-
er person through a crowd without
being noticed. (In the wilderness, use
Tracking and Stealth.) Roll a Quick
Contest every 10 minutes: your
Shadowing vs. the subject’s Vision
roll. If you lose, you lost the subject; if
you lose by more than 5, you were
seen.
Once the subject is aware you are
shadowing him, roll a Quick Contest
every five minutes: your Shadowing
skill vs. his Shadowing or Stealth
skill. If he wins, he eludes you. If he
loses by more than 5, he thinks he
eluded you. If you critically fail, you
lose him and follow the wrong person.
Following someone in a vehicle is
harder than shadowing on foot. Use
the same rules, but you roll at -2 (and
may not use your Stealth default).
Modifiers: -3 if the subject knows
you. Distinctive appearance gives a
penalty – see Build (p. 18), Unnatural
Features (p. 22), and specific disadvan-
tages (e.g., Hunchback, p. 139) for
details. If you belong to a visibly dif-
ferent race than most of the people
around you, the penalty is up to the
GM; it is never smaller in magnitude
than the difference between your Size
Modifier and that of those around
you.
SKILLS 219




Shield†
DX/Easy
Default: DX-4.
This is the ability to use a shield,
both to block and to attack. Your
active defense with any kind of shield
– your Block score – is (skill/2) + 3,
rounded down. You must specialize:
Shield:  Any shield held in place
with straps. Such shields have the
advantage that you can hold (but not
wield) something in your shield hand,
but the disadvantage of being slow to
put on or take off. This is the most
common specialty – list it as “Shield”
on character sheets.
Buckler: Any kind of shield, usually
a small one, held in the hand. A buck-
ler occupies one hand completely, but
you can ready it in only one turn and
drop it as a free action.
Force: Any shield with a blocking
“surface” formed from energy rather
than matter.
Shield, Shield (Buckler), and
Shield (Force) default to one another
at -2.
Shiphandling/TL†
IQ/Hard
Defaults: IQ-6 and others.
Prerequisites: see below.
This is the ability to act as the mas-
ter of a large vessel. It involves direct-
ing the crew in the tasks necessary to
control the vehicle’s speed and direc-
tion. It also covers such duties as keep-
ing the captain’s log and inspecting the
crew. Someone with Shiphandling
skill (at better than default!) should
stand watch at all times when the ves-
sel is underway. Roll vs. skill when
encountering hazards or maneuvering
for battle.
A failed roll when encountering
hazards means the vessel is damaged.
This might mean anything from
scratched paint to crippling damage
that requires extensive repairs.
A failed roll in battle means the ves-
sel did not go exactly where intended.
The details depend on the vessel, the
tech level, and the GM’s judgment, but
might include weapons being
“masked” (unable to engage the
enemy), a failed boarding attempt, or
drifting out of formation with 
your fleet (which might deny you the
benefits of area defenses, fire support,
or tactical communications).
A critical failure under any circum-
stances means an appropriate disaster.
Depending on the TL and situation,
this could mean running aground, col-
liding with another vessel, being dis-
masted, losing your screws or rudder,
or simply giving an order that your
crew disregards. Whether they then
save your ship for you, or mutiny and
flee, is up to the GM.
You must specialize:
Airship:  Blimps, zeppelins, and
similar large airships. Prerequisites:
Airshipman, Leadership, and
Navigation (Air). Defaults:
Airshipman-5 or Piloting (Lighter-
Than-Air)-5.
Ship:  Surface vessels, from tug-
boats to carriers. Prerequisites:
Leadership, Navigation (Sea), and
Seamanship.  Defaults: Seamanship-5,
or to Boating (Large Powerboat)-5 for
ships with engines or Boating
(Sailboat)-5 for tall ships.
Spaceship: Slower-than-light space-
craft.  Prerequisites:  Leadership,
Navigation (Space), and Spacer.
Defaults: Spacer-5 or any spaceship
Piloting-5.
Starship:  Faster-than-light space-
craft.  Prerequisites:  Leadership,
Navigation (Hyperspace), and Spacer.
Defaults: Spacer-5 or any spaceship
Piloting-5.
Submarine: All forms of large sub-
mersibles.  Prerequisites: Leadership,
Navigation (Sea), and Submariner.
Defaults: Submariner-5 or Submarine
(Large Sub)-5.
Modifiers: -2 to master an unfamil-
iar vessel (e.g., an aircraft carrier
when you’re used to a battleship); -2
for an unfamiliar crew; -2 or more for
a vehicle in bad repair.
Shortsword
see Melee Weapon, p. 208
Singing
HT/Easy
Default: HT-4.
This is the ability to sing in a pleas-
ing fashion. A successful roll means
the audience liked your song.
Modifiers:  Language Modifiers
(p. 24), if you are singing in a foreign
language; -2 if the audience does not
understand the language; +2 for Voice
(p. 97); -2 for Stuttering (p. 157).
Skating
HT/Hard
Default: HT-6.
When you are moving on skates,
this skill replaces Hiking skill (p. 200)
for routine travel and Running skill
(p. 218) for racing. The GM may also
require DX-based skill rolls in combat
or chases, or for hazardous maneu-
vers, conditions, or speeds. Under
those circumstances, any failure indi-
cates a fall, while critical failure
results in 1d-2 damage to a randomly
chosen limb.
220 SKILLS
A critical failure under any circumstances
means an appropriate disaster: running
aground, colliding with another vessel, being 
dismasted, losing your screws or rudder, or 
simply giving an order that your crew disregards.




Skiing
HT/Hard
Default: HT-6.
This replaces Hiking skill (p. 200)
when you are skiing cross-country
and Running skill (p. 218) when you
are racing. Roll once per day of rou-
tine travel. The GM may require
much more frequent skill rolls – usu-
ally DX-based – in combat or chases,
or for hazardous maneuvers, condi-
tions, or speeds. In those situations,
any failure indicates a fall, while crit-
ical failure means 1d damage to a ran-
domly chosen limb.
Sleight of Hand
DX/Hard
Default: Filch-5.
This is the ability to “palm” small
objects, do coin and card tricks, etc.
Make a skill roll to perform one piece
of simple “stage magic.” A failed roll
means you blew the trick.
When you use this skill to steal, you
must win a Quick Contest of Sleight of
Hand vs. the Vision roll or
Observation skill of potential witness-
es to perform the theft unnoticed.
You can also use this skill to cheat
at cards, dice, etc. A successful Sleight
of Hand roll gives from +1 to +5 on
your Gambling roll. Any failure causes
you to be denounced as a cheater! In
both cases, the exact results are up to
the GM.
Modifiers: +3 if the light is dim; +3
if you have a confederate to distract
attention; +5 if you have prepared in
advance (cards up your sleeve, etc.); -3
if the person you want to fool knows
Sleight of Hand himself; modifiers for
High Manual Dexterity (p. 59) or
Ham-Fisted (p. 138).
Sling
DX/Hard
Default: DX-6.
This is the ability to use the sling or
staff sling.
Smallsword
see Melee Weapon, p. 208
Smith/TL†
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5 and others.
This is the ability to work non-
precious metals by hand. You must
specialize:
Copper: Copper itself and its alloys,
including brass and bronze.
Traditionally, a smith who worked
with these metals was called a
“brownsmith.” Default: Jeweler-4.
Iron: The skill of being a black-
smith. Also covers steel, at tech levels
where it exists.
Lead and Tin: Any of the softer,
“white” metals, including alloys such
as pewter. The traditional name for
such a smith was “whitesmith.”
Default: Jeweler-4.
These specialties default to one
another at -4.
This skill is IQ-based, but ST is
important, and some tools have a
“Minimum ST,” just like weapons.
Smuggling
IQ/Average
Default: IQ-5.
This is the ability to conceal items
in baggage and vehicles. You can also
use it to hide an object in a room or a
building. Roll against skill to hide an
item from casual inspection. In an
active search, the searchers must win
a Quick Contest of Search vs. your
Smuggling skill to find the item.
Modifiers:  Equipment modifiers
(p. 345) for specialized smuggling
gear. The difference  between the Size
Modifier (p. 19) of the package, vehi-
cle, or room in which you are hiding
the item and that of the item itself;
e.g., to hide a bottle of liquor (SM -5)
in a family car (SM +3), you would roll
at +8.
Sociology
IQ/Hard
Defaults: IQ-6, Anthropology-3, or
Psychology-4.
This is the study of societies and
social relationships. A successful skill
roll lets you judge how well a large
group of people will work together;
deduce the social pressures contribut-
ing to a crime wave, revolution, war,
etc.; or predict the most probable out-
come of dissimilar societies coming
into contact.
Soldier/TL
IQ/Average
Default: IQ-5.
This skill represents a combination
of basic military training – the lessons
taught at “boot camp” or its equivalent
in your game world – and actual com-
bat experience. Only those who have
served in an army, militia, etc. are like-
ly to know it.
The GM may require a Soldier roll
whenever circumstances would test
your battlefield discipline (knowing
when to shoot, use concealment, take
cover, etc.) or skill at practical field
survival (e.g., keeping your feet dry
and eating when you get the chance).
Roll daily during prolonged military
action. Failure means an inconven-
ience – perhaps a minor piece of
equipment fails. Critical failure indi-
cates a disaster: “friendly fire” inci-
dent, trench foot, etc.
Soldier includes basic lessons in
many fields covered by other skills.
For instance, a TL8 soldier learns to
strip his rifle without learning
Armoury (Small Arms), to use a radio
without learning Electronics
Operation (Comm), to dig a foxhole
without learning Engineer (Combat),
and so forth. In a situation where
someone with one of those skills
would roll at +4 or better for a routine
task (see Task Difficulty, p. 345), the
GM may let you roll against Soldier
skill instead. You do not receive the
bonus that someone with the full-
fledged skill would get, but you do suf-
fer any situational penalties.
Soldier can only substitute for skill
rolls to do things that would be a
believable part of basic training. This
means the routine use of standard
equipment by ordinary troops – not
research, improvisation, or design,
and never the operation of new or
secret technologies! Soldier cannot
replace weapon skills, either; you
must buy all such skills separately.
Example:  If someone with
Electronics Operation (Comm) would
be at +4 to call HQ on a standard-issue
radio, you could do so with a success-
ful Soldier roll. However, you could
not use Soldier to fix a broken radio,
use an enemy radio, or transmit coded
signals.
SKILLS 221




Spacer/TL
see Crewman, p. 185
Spear
see Melee Weapon, p. 208
Spear Thrower
DX/Average
Defaults: DX-5 or Thrown Weapon
(Spear)-4.
This is the ability to use the spear
thrower: a long, flat stick with a notch
or a loop at one end. It increases the
force with which you can hurl a javelin
or similar weapon. It takes one turn to
position the spear in the thrower after
both are in hand and ready.
Modifiers: -5 in tight quarters (less
than two yards of overhead clear-
ance).
Speed-Reading
IQ/Average
Defaults: None.
This is the ability to read much
faster than normal. Whenever time is
of the essence (for instance, when
reading the instructions on a para-
chute as you fall), multiply your read-
ing speed by a factor of 1 + (skill/10);
e.g., Speed-Reading-12 would give a
factor of 2.2. Make a skill roll to deter-
mine whether you retain what you
have read.
On a failure, your recall is shaky.
Every time you try to remember or use
what you read, you must make an IQ
roll at a penalty equal to your margin
of failure. Roll at +5 if you have
Eidetic Memory, or +10 for
Photographic Memory. If this roll
fails, you cannot recall the informa-
tion; on a critical failure, you recall
badly flawed information but believe
it to be true! To eliminate this IQ roll,
you must go back and reread the
material slowly.
Modifiers:  Language modifiers
(p. 24).
Sports
DX/Average
Defaults: DX-5 and others.
This is the ability to play a particu-
lar sport well – perhaps well enough to
earn a living. Each sport is a separate
Sports skill. Most Sports skills are
DX/Average and default to DX-5, but
those that put a premium on strength
(e.g., rugby) might default to ST-5.
Some Sports skills might default to
one another or to other skills as well.
Make an IQ-based roll to recall the
basic  rules of your sport. Detailed
knowledge of the full rules governing
leagues and tournaments – as would
be expected of a coach or referee – is
covered by the relevant Games skill
(p. 197).
The GM may rule that certain
Sports are useful in combat situations.
For instance, Sports (Baseball) might
let you use a bat to parry hurled rocks
and grenades at (skill/2) + 3, Sports
(Bullfighting) might give a Parry equal
to (skill/2) + 3 against a slam by a
beast that uses a “running head butt,”
and you might be able to roll against
Sports (Rugby) to hit with a slam.
Staff
see Melee Weapon, p. 208
Stage Combat
DX/Average
Defaults: Combat Art or Sport-2, an
actual combat skill-3, or Performance-
3.
This skill allows you to perform a
choreographed fight safely, yet in an
entertaining manner. A critical failure
indicates an injury: 1d-2 damage to a
random location.
Modifiers: -4 for an unfamiliar
weapon.
Stealth
DX/Average
Defaults: DX-5 or IQ-5.
This is the ability to hide and to
move silently. A successful roll lets you
conceal yourself anywhere except in a
totally bare room, or move so quietly
that nobody will hear you, or follow
someone without being noticed. (To
follow someone through a crowd, use
Shadowing, p. 219.)
If someone is specifically on the
alert for intruders, the GM will roll a
Quick Contest between your Stealth
and the sentinel’s Perception.
You can also use this skill to stalk
game. A successful roll (and about 30
minutes) gets you within 30 yards of
most animals. Another roll, at -5, gets
you within 15 yards.
Modifiers:  A penalty equal to your
encumbrance level. -5 to hide in an
area without “natural” hiding places,
or +3 or more if there are many hiding
places. -5 to move silently if you are
moving faster than Move 1. -5 to fool
those with Discriminatory Smell (e.g.,
dogs).
Strategy†
IQ/Hard
Defaults: IQ-6, Intelligence
Analysis-6, or Tactics-6.
This is the ability to plan military
actions and predict the actions of the
enemy. In most settings, only the 
military teaches this skill.
A successful Strategy roll lets you
deduce, in advance, enemy military
plans unless another person with this
skill leads them. In that case, the GM
rolls a Quick Contest of Strategy. The
amount of information gained
depends on how well you roll (but not
on the quality of the foe’s plans). If
you fail an uncontested roll or lose a
Quick Contest, the GM gives you false
information.
You must  specialize in a type of
strategy – Land, Naval, Space, etc.
These specialties default to one 
222 SKILLS
A successful Streetwise roll might let you learn
where any sort of illegal “action” is; which local
cops or bureaucrats can be bought, and for how
much; and how to contact the local underworld.




another at -4. The specific units being
commanded are less important; even
the units of another nation or tech
level would give -1 or -2 at most (GM’s
judgment), as long as you had accurate
information about their capabilities.
Streetwise
IQ/Average
Default: IQ-5.
This is the skill of getting along in
rough company. A successful
Streetwise roll might let you learn
(among other things) where any sort
of illegal “action” is; which local cops
or bureaucrats can be bought, and for
how much; and how to contact the
local underworld. Note that you might
also be able to get this information by
asking a Contact (p. 44). This skill is a
measure of your ability to make new
connections as needed.
You may substitute an Influence
roll against Streetwise for any reaction
roll made in an underworld or “bad
neighborhood” situation; see Influence
Rolls (p. 359).
Modifiers: +3 if you have a tough
reputation (either “good” or “bad”) in
the area; -3 if you are obviously a
stranger in the area. -3 for Low
Empathy (p. 142); -1 for Oblivious
(p. 146); -1 to -4 for Shyness (p. 154).
Submarine/TL†
DX/Average
Default: IQ-6.
This is the ability to operate a spe-
cific type of underwater vehicle. As
with Piloting, the default is to IQ, but
when you learn the skill, always base it
on DX.
Roll against Submarine to dive or
to surface, to maneuver in underwater
combat, or to negotiate hazardous
waters. Failure can mean anything
from a slight drift off course to a colli-
sion; critical failure may strand the
vessel underwater!
Make an IQ-based Submarine roll
for basic chart reading or practical
oceanography, or to recall nautical
laws and regulations.
You must specialize:
Free-Flooding Sub: Any small, open
submersible. The crew is exposed to
the water, and must wear underwater
breathing gear. Prerequisites:  Diving
Suit or  Scuba.  Defaults: Large Sub-5
or Mini-Sub-4.
Large Sub: Any crewed, long-dura-
tion submersible, including attack
subs and missile subs. Defaults: Free-
Flooding Sub-5 or Mini-Sub-4.
Mini-Sub: Any small, closed, short-
duration submersible, typical of those
used for scientific research. Defaults:
Free-Flooding Sub-4 or Large Sub-4.
Modifiers: -2 for an unfamiliar sub-
marine within your specialty (e.g., a
diesel attack sub when you are used to
a nuclear missile sub); -4 or more for
a vessel in bad repair; -1 to -10 for nav-
igational hazards.
Submariner/TL
see Crewman, p. 185
Suggest
see Enthrallment, p. 191
Sumo Wrestling
DX/Average
Defaults: None.
This unarmed combat skill repre-
sents  any training at grabbing, shov-
ing, and tripping – not just the tradi-
tional Japanese sport of sumo. Roll
against the higher  of DX or Sumo
Wrestling to hit with a grapple, slam,
or shove, or to make or resist a take-
down. If you know this skill at DX+1
level, add +1 to ST whenever you
make or resist a grapple or takedown,
and whenever you attempt to break
free, and +1 per die to your damage
when you slam or shove. These bonus-
es increase to +2 if you know Sumo at
DX+2 or better.
When you defend with bare hands,
Sumo Wrestling allows you to parry
once  per turn. You must use both
hands. Your Parry score is (skill/2) + 3,
rounded down. This parry is meant to
ward off slams, grapples, and bare-
handed slaps. You parry at -2 vs. kicks
and -3 vs. weapons. For complete
rules for parrying barehanded, see
Parrying Unarmed (p. 376).
Surgery/TL
IQ/Very Hard
Defaults: First Aid-12, Physician-5,
Physiology-8, or Veterinary-5.
Prerequisites: First Aid or
Physician.
This is skill at using invasive med-
ical techniques to treat sickness or
injury. Roll once per operation. On a
success, the operation proceeded
without complications. On a failure,
the patient took damage – 2d for a
simple amputation, 3d for other pro-
cedures. Surgery rolls can also facili-
tate recovery from wounds; see
Surgery (p. 424).
This skill represents general surgi-
cal expertise, which is relatively rare in
real life. Most surgeons have an option-
al specialty (p. 169) in a certain part of
the body (brain, heart, etc.) or a specif-
ic type of surgery (cosmetic surgery,
microsurgery, transplant surgery, etc.).
Modifiers:  Equipment modifiers
(p. 345); physiology modifiers (p. 181);
-3 if the area or equipment cannot be
properly cleaned and sterilized; -3 for
head or chest surgery; -5 for undiag-
nosed problems. If you lack Physician
skill, you are at -5 to do anything but
“field-expedient” surgery (e.g., stitch
wounds or extract arrowheads, bul-
lets, and shrapnel).
Survival†
Per/Average
Defaults: Perception-5 or Naturalist
(same planet)-3.
This is the ability to “live off the
land,” find safe food and water, avoid
hazards, build shelter, etc. You may
look after up to 10 other people. To
live safely in a wilderness situation,
you must make a successful Survival
roll once per day. Failure inflicts 2d-4
injury on you and anyone in your care;
roll separately for each victim.
This skill also gives an “eye for
country.” A successful roll shows you
the best direction of travel to find
flowing water, a mountain pass, or
whatever other terrain feature you
desire – assuming that it exists.
Finally, you can use this skill to trap
wild animals. (A city-bred thief could
use Traps skill, but he’s used to differ-
ent game . . . so the roll would be at a
-5.) Make one roll per trap. It takes
about 30 minutes to improvise a trap
from ordinary materials, or 10 minutes
to set and hide a commercial steel trap.
Pit traps for large game take several
hours to dig.
Survival often requires skill rolls
based on scores other than Percep-
SKILLS 223




tion. The GM might ask for a ST-based
roll to dig a pit trap or erect a log shel-
ter, a DX-based roll to start a fire using
primitive techniques (flint sparking,
bow and palette, etc.), or even a HT-
based roll to avoid nutritional defi-
ciencies from an improvised diet.
You  must  specialize by terrain
type. Land-dwellers may choose from
Arctic, Desert, Island/Beach, Jungle,
Mountain, Plains, Swampland, and
Woodlands. Aquatic beings may take
any of Bank, Deep Ocean Vent, Fresh-
Water Lake, Open Ocean, Reef,
River/Stream, Salt-Water Sea, and
Tropical Lagoon. Amphibious individ-
uals can pick from either list!
Land specialties default to one
another at -3, while aquatic specialties
default among themselves at -4.
Island/Beach and Tropical Lagoon
default to each other at -4, as do
Swampland and River/Stream, but
there are no other defaults between
land and aquatic specialties.
In settings where it is possible to
visit other worlds, you must also spe-
cialize by planet. Each Survival spe-
cialty defaults to the same terrain type
for a different planet at -4. The defaults
between terrain types given above are
at an extra -4 between different plan-
ets. All this assumes the two planets
are of the same planet type (see Planet
Types, p. 180). There is no default at all
between Survival skills for two planets
of different planet types.
At the GM’s option, extreme man-
made terrain may call for unique spe-
cialties; e.g., Survival (Radioactive
Wasteland). Most such specialties
have no default of any kind.
See also Urban Survival, p. 228.
Modifiers:  Up to -5 for extreme
weather conditions. Equipment modi-
fiers (p. 345).
Sway Emotions
see Enthrallment, p. 191
Swimming
HT/Easy
Default: HT-4.
This is the skill of swimming
(whether on purpose or to keep afloat
in emergencies) and lifesaving. Roll
against the higher of Swimming or HT
to avoid fatigue while swimming or
injury due to aquatic misfortunes.
When racing someone of equal water
Move, roll a Quick Contest of
Swimming to determine the winner.
See Swimming (p. 354).
Note that Swimming does not
cover high diving – that’s Sports
(Diving).
Symbol Drawing†
IQ/Hard
Defaults: Special.
This is the art of scribing magical
symbols. Depending on your magical
tradition, you might carve these sym-
bols with a ritual dagger, draw them
on the ground or an altar using blood
or ceremonial powders, write them in
ink, trace them in the air with a wand
or your fingers, or something else. You
must specialize in a particular magical
tradition.
In traditions where magical power
flows from the caster, nature, spirits,
etc. as opposed to the symbols them-
selves, the symbols provide a focus
that aids magic use. Roll against
Symbol Drawing before each ritual.
On a success, add half your margin of
success (round down) to your skill
with the next ritual you conduct over
the symbols. This kind of Symbol
Drawing defaults to Ritual Magic
(same)-4. For instance, Symbol
Drawing (Voodoo) defaults to Ritual
Magic (Voodoo)-4, and lets you draw
the vevers used in Voodoo ritual.
In traditions where the symbols
themselves  imbue items or places (or
even  people, in the case of tattoos)
with magic, the magic is only as good
as the symbols. Roll against the lower
of Symbol Drawing and your skill with
the enchantment itself. This is most
common in rune magic. Each runic
alphabet is a separate Symbol
Drawing skill with no default. For
instance, Symbol Drawing (Futhark
Runes) would let you scribe the runes
used in Norse magic.
More-exotic traditions may have
their own rules; see the appropriate
worldbook for more information.
Modifiers: -1 or more if using non-
traditional means to mark the sym-
bols; -1 or more if placing the symbols
on any surface other than those 
prescribed by your tradition.
Tactics
IQ/Hard
Defaults: IQ-6 or Strategy (any)-6.
This is the ability to outguess and
outmaneuver the enemy in small-unit
or personal combat. In most settings,
only the military teaches this skill.
When commanding a small unit,
roll against Tactics to place your
troops correctly for an ambush, know
where to post sentries, etc. At the GM’s
option, a successful roll might even
provide clues as to immediate enemy
plans. To outmaneuver enemy units,
you must win a Quick Contest of
Tactics with their leader. All of this
only applies when you lead a group
small enough that you can give each
warrior orders personally – or through
at most one subordinate. Thus, radio
and similar technologies can greatly
enhance your command abilities!
In personal combat, you may make
a Tactics roll before the fight begins if
you had any time to prepare. On a suc-
cess, you start the fight in an advanta-
geous position – e.g., behind cover or
on higher ground – as determined by
the GM. The better the roll, the greater
your advantage. If you fail, or do not
attempt a Tactics roll, you are in a ran-
dom location (or one of the GM’s
choosing) when combat begins.
Fighters without Tactics skill always
start combat this way.
Even in an ambush or similar “sur-
prise” situation, the GM will use the
better  of your Tactics skill and your
Perception to see if you spotted the
danger on time.
Teaching
IQ/Average
Default: IQ-5.
This is the ability to instruct others.
If you have Teaching at level 12+, you
may act as a teacher for game purpos-
es. For more on teaching and learning,
see  Improvement Through Study
(p. 292).
Modifiers: -3 for Callous (p. 125); -1
to -4 for Shyness (p. 142). Apply both
the teacher’s and the student’s
Language penalties (p. 24) in the 
language of instruction.
224 SKILLS




Teamster†
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5, Animal Handling
(same)-4, or Riding (same)-2.
This is the skill of driving a team of
animals pulling a wagon, chariot, etc.
It includes the ability to harness and
care for the beasts, and judge them for
quality before purchase. If the animals
are ornery or badly trained (GM’s
judgment), you must make a success-
ful Animal Handling roll before you
can attempt a Teamster roll.
For normal travel, make a
Teamster roll once per day. When
moving at a gallop (80% or more of
the animals’ full Move) or when exe-
cuting complex maneuvers with a
chariot in combat, roll every 10 
seconds.
A failure usually means nothing
worse than lost time or a wider turn
than intended. A critical failure – or
any  failure at a gallop – spills the
wagon or chariot. Treat this as a five-
yard fall for each passenger and 
animal involved (see Falling, p. 431).
As well, roll 2d for each beast; on a 12,
a leg is broken! You will have to make
Animal Handling rolls to calm the
beasts. Time required to reload the
cargo depends on the load, terrain,
and weather.
You  must  specialize by animal
type; the most common specialty is
Teamster (Equines), which covers
horses and mules. Teamster special-
ties default to one another at -3.
Modifiers: -2 for more than four
animals; -2 for a team of unfamiliar
animals; up to -5 for bad terrain.
Thaumatology
IQ/Very Hard
Default: IQ-7*.
* There is no default in a nonmag-
ical setting, or for those who have
never witnessed “real” magic.
This is the academic study of mag-
ical theory and the “physics” of mana.
Anyone may learn this skill, but it is
easier for a mage; add Magery to IQ
when learning this skill, just as for
spells.
The main use for this skill is magi-
cal research. When creating a new
spell, use the rules for inventing (see
Chapter 17), but replace Engineer skill
with Thaumatology. A successful skill
roll can also identify an unknown spell
when you see it cast, deduce the rami-
fications of a critical success or failure
with magic, determine the spells need-
ed to enchant a magic item to perform
as desired, etc. The better your roll,
the more insight the GM will provide.
This is the study of fantasy magic –
fireball spells, rings of power, etc. The
equivalent skill for traditional, spirit-
mediated sorcery is Ritual Magic
(p. 218), while holy magic might
require Religious Ritual (p. 217) or
Theology (p. 226). However, a
Thaumatology roll at -5 will allow a
thaumatologist to relate these differ-
ent varieties of magic to “standard”
wizardry. Exceptionally weird powers
or otherworldly artifacts might give a
larger penalty!
SKILLS 225
In traditions where magical power flows from the
caster, nature, spirits, etc., as opposed to the symbols
themselves, the symbols provide a focus that aids
magic use.




Theology†
IQ/Hard
Defaults: IQ-6 or Religious Ritual
(same)-4.
This is the study of a particular
religion: its gods, cosmology, doc-
trines, scriptures, etc. You must spe-
cialize by religion. There are usually
no defaults between specialties, but
the GM might permit a default at -4
or so for belief systems that have sim-
ilar origins, or where one is derived
from the other.
Alternatively, you may study the
similarities and differences between
religions; this is Theology
(Comparative). The Theology of any
religion routinely studied by scholars
in your game world defaults to this
specialty at -5.
To be a priest or holy man at
TL1+, you must have both Theology
and Religious Ritual skill (p. 217) for
your religion. TL0 shamans need
only learn Religious Ritual.
You do not necessarily believe in
the religion you study – faith comes
from within, not from book learning!
If you do, you may ask the GM to
make a secret roll against your
Theology skill when confronted with
moral uncertainty. On a success, the
GM will advise you on which course of
action “feels” right, given your beliefs
and understanding of scripture.
Throwing
DX/Average
Defaults: DX-3 or Dropping-4.
This is the ability to throw any
small, relatively smooth object that
fits in the palm of your hand.
Examples include baseballs, hand
grenades, and rocks. (Boomerangs,
javelins, knives, etc. require their own
specialized skills; see Thrown Weapon,
below.) Roll against skill to hit.
Furthermore, if you know Throwing
at DX+1 level, add +1 to ST when fig-
uring throwing distance (but not dam-
age). Add +2 to ST for Throwing at
DX+2 or better.
If you do not have this skill, roll
against your default to hit a specific
target, but against full  DX to lob an
object into a general area.
Throwing Art
DX/Hard
Defaults: None.
Prerequisites: Trained By A Master
or Weapon Master.
This is the cinematic ability to
throw anything you are strong enough
to lift: knives, medicine balls, televi-
sions . . . anything! Roll against skill to
hit. Furthermore, if you know
Throwing Art at DX level, add +1 to ST
when figuring throwing distance, and
+1  per die of damage with thrown
weapons. These bonuses increase to
+2 if you know Throwing Art at DX+1
or better. If you are a Weapon Master,
this bonus is instead of the usual dam-
age bonus for your weapon.
You can use the items you throw as
improvised weapons. Treat forks,
kitchen knives, and other long, sharp
objects as daggers. Any small, blunt
object does thrust+1 crushing dam-
age. Baseball bats do swing+1 crush-
ing. Pencils do thrust-3 impaling.
Playing cards do thrust-3 cutting.
Throwing Art lets you throw any-
thing covered by the Throwing and
Thrown Weapon skills. If you have
Throwing Art, you do not need those
skills.
Thrown Weapon†
DX/Easy
Defaults: DX-4 and others.
This is the ability to hurl any one
type of thrown weapon. You must spe-
cialize:
Axe/Mace:  Any axe, hatchet, or
mace balanced for throwing (but not
an unbalanced battleaxe or maul!).
Dart: Any sort of small, finned dart.
Games (Darts) defaults to this skill at
no penalty. Default: Throwing-2.
Harpoon: Any sort of tethered spear.
Default: Thrown Weapon (Spear)-2.
Knife: Any sort of knife.
Shuriken: Any sort of hiltless blade,
notably  shuriken  (“ninja stars”).
Default: Throwing-2.
Spear:  Any sort of spear, javelin,
etc.  Defaults: Spear Thrower-4 or
Thrown Weapon (Harpoon)-2.
Stick: Any balanced and shaped
throwing stick, such as a boomerang.
This type of throwing stick does not
return to the user.
Tonfa
see Melee Weapon, p. 208
Tracking
Per/Average
Defaults: Perception-5 or
Naturalist-5.
This is the ability to follow a man
or an animal by its tracks. Make a
Tracking roll to pick up the trail, then
roll periodically to avoid losing it. The
frequency and difficulty of these rolls
depend on the terrain:
Jungle, Plains, or Woodlands: Roll
every 30 minutes.
Arctic, Desert, Island/Beach, or
Mountain: Roll at -2 every 15 minutes.
Swampland: Roll at -4 every 5 min-
utes.
Urban: Roll at -6 every minute!
You may also use this skill to cover
your tracks. This doubles your travel
time! A successful roll means you have
hidden your tracks well enough that
only someone else with this skill can
see them. If another tracker follows
you, the Tracking rolls above become
Quick Contests of Tracking skill. If he
loses any of the Contests, he loses your
trail.
To stalk game once you have
tracked it, use the Stealth skill (p. 222).
Modifiers: -5 if the trail is more
than a day old, or -10 if more than a
week old. +3 if you are following a
man, or +6 if following a group of
men. Superior senses help a lot:
bonuses for Acute Vision (p. 35) and
Discriminatory Smell (p. 49) usually
apply, and many superhuman senses
(Infravision, Subsonic Hearing, etc.)
give situational bonuses.
Traps/TL
IQ/Average
Defaults: IQ-5 or Lockpicking-3*.
* Also defaults to DX-5 if you are
disarming or resetting a trap, but not if
you are detecting or building one.
This is the skill of building and nul-
lifying traps. A successful Traps roll
will (among other things) disarm a
trap once you have found it, reset it
after you pass, or build a new trap
(given suitable materials). Time
required is as for Lockpicking (p. 206).
226 SKILLS




To detect  a trap, make a Perception-
based skill roll.
Note that for the purposes of Traps
skill, detection devices are “traps.”
Thus, this skill covers everything from
covered pits to elaborate electronic
security systems!
Modifiers:  Infinitely variable. The
more sophisticated the trap, the hard-
er it will be to disarm, reset, build, or
find – and a given trap might be (for
instance) easy to find but hard to dis-
arm. The GM should be creative!
Equipment modifiers (p. 345) apply to
most rolls to set or disarm traps.
Bonuses for Acute Vision (p. 35) apply
to rolls to detect traps (only).
Two-Handed Axe/Mace
see Melee Weapon, p. 208
SKILLS 227
Example of Character Creation (concluded)
Dai has spent 203 of his 250 points, leaving him with
47 points for skills. Reading through the skill list, we see
dozens of skills that suit a master thief – but since we’re
on a budget, we settle on the following.
First, a thief must be stealthy. For this, Dai needs the
Stealth skill (p. 222). We want this to be reliable, so we
choose skill level 16. At that level, only a roll of 17 or 18
will fail . . . and that’s a failure for anyone. Stealth is a
DX/Average skill. Since Dai’s DX is 15, level 16 is DX+1
for him. From the Skill Cost Table (p. 170), we learn that
a level of Attribute+1 in an Average skill costs 4 points.
Any thief worth his salt can pick pockets and open
locks. This calls for Pickpocket (p. 213) and Lockpicking
(p. 206). We want to buy Dai a 15 in both – not as high
as his Stealth, but still reliable. Pickpocket is DX/Hard.
Skill 15 is DX level, and from the table, we see this costs
4 points for a Hard skill. Lockpicking, on the other
hand, is IQ/Average. With Dai’s IQ 12, skill 15 is IQ+3
level. This costs 12 points – it’s very expensive to raise a
skill so far above its controlling attribute!
We also want Dai to be an adept second-story man
and escape artist, so we spend 1 point apiece on
Climbing (p. 183) and Escape (p. 192). Climbing is
DX/Average; 1 point buys DX-1 level, giving skill 14.
Escape is DX/Hard; 1 point is only good for DX-2 level,
or skill 13. Of course, we selected these skills knowing
that Dai’s Flexibility advantage would give +3 to both!
His Perfect Balance adds another +1 to Climbing, too.
His final levels are Climbing at 18 and Escape at 16.
To case an area before he strikes, Dai needs
Observation skill (p. 211). This is Per/Average. But Dai’s
Perception is a whopping 15, so he doesn’t need to
spend many points: 2 points buys Observation at Per
level (15), which is more than good enough.
Since stealth can fail, we want to give Dai some com-
bat skills for backup. We decide that he prefers knives.
Knife skill (p. 208) is fine for melee combat, but we also
want Dai to be good at the quick draw and with throw-
ing knives. Fast-Draw (p. 194) and Thrown Weapon
(p. 226) fit the bill. Both require a specialty – in this case,
“Knife.” All of these skills are DX/Easy. With Dai’s low
ST, he’ll need superb aim to make a knife effective, so we
settle on 17 in Knife and Thrown Weapon (Knife). This
is DX+2 level, which costs 4 points per skill. Fast-Draw
(Knife) is a neat trick, but skill 15 is plenty. This costs 1
point.
To reflect Dai’s medieval background, we decide that
he is a fair hand with the shortsword. But not too good
– swords are expensive, and Dai grew up poor. We give
him the Shortsword skill (p. 209) at 15. Shortsword is
DX/Average, so this costs 2 points.
As an ISWAT officer, Dai should know how to shoot.
A slim target pistol sounds like his kind of gun.
Reviewing the Guns skill (p. 198), we see that pistols call
for the “Pistol” specialty. Guns are new to Dai, so we
spend only 1 point. Since Guns (Pistol) is DX/Easy, this
buys DX level: a very adequate 15.
To conceal all these weapons, Dai needs Holdout skill
(p. 200). This is IQ/Average. Dai doesn’t routinely carry
concealed weapons, so we just give him IQ level – 12 –
for 2 points.
We decide to give Dai some “background skills” next.
He grew up on the street, so Urban Survival (p. 228) fits:
it’s the ability to scrounge food and shelter in the city. A
Per/Average skill, 1 point buys Per-1 level, or 14. Filch
(p. 195) covers shoplifting. It’s DX/Average; 1 point buys
DX-1, also 14. Survival has a social side, too. We give
Dai Fast-Talk (p. 195) to talk his way out of jams and
Streetwise (p. 223) to deal with professional criminals.
Both are IQ/Average. We buy IQ level (12) in each, at 2
points a skill.
Dai has now spent 44 of his remaining 47 points. We
decide to put his last three points into skills that com-
plement his advantages.
Rereading the descriptions of his advantages, we see
that Perfect Balance gives +1 to Acrobatics (p. 174).
That’s definitely Dai’s style! Acrobatics is DX/Hard, so 2
points buys DX-1 level, or 14. With the +1 for Perfect
Balance, he gets a 15.
We also discover that Absolute Direction gives +3 to
Body Sense (p. 181): the skill of reorienting yourself
after teleportation. This sounds ideal for Dai! We put 1
point into Body Sense, which is DX/Hard. This buys
DX-2 level, or 13. The +3 for Absolute Direction makes
this 16.
At this stage, Dai has spent all 250 points. If we want-
ed to add more abilities, we could add more disadvan-
tages to pay for them – but we want Dai to be carefree,
not saddled with problems.
Now it’s time to write it all down. Dai’s character
sheet appears on p. 311.




Two-Handed Flail
see Melee Weapon, p. 208
Two-Handed Sword
see Melee Weapon, p. 208
Typing
DX/Easy
Defaults: DX-4 and others.
This is the skill of using a type-
writer. Typing speed is skill ¥ 3 words
per minute (wpm) on a manual, skill ¥
5 wpm on an electric typewriter or
computer keyboard.
This skill defaults at -3 to any skill
that involves a lot of typing, notably
Administration, Computer Operation,
Research, and Writing, and
Professional Skills such as Journalist.
If you have such a skill, Typing skill is
redundant (unless you wish to work as
a professional typist).
Urban Survival
Per/Average
Default: Perception-5.
This talent covers the physical part
of staying alive in a city environment,
whether it’s overpopulated or empty.
(The  social problems of city survival
are covered by Streetwise skill.) A suc-
cessful skill roll allows you to find
clean rainwater; locate manholes from
above or below; quickly locate build-
ing entrances, exits, stairwells, etc.;
recognize and avoid physically dan-
gerous areas, such as crumbling build-
ings; make and read city maps; find
your way out of strange city areas;
find a warm place to sleep outside in
cold weather; and locate common
types of buildings or businesses with-
out asking anyone, just by your “feel”
for the way cities are laid out.
Vacc Suit/TL
see Environment Suit, p. 192
Ventriloquism
IQ/Hard
Defaults: None.
This is the ability to disguise and
“throw” your voice a short distance. A
successful roll lets you throw 
your voice well enough to fool your
audience.
Modifiers: +5 if you have a dummy
or confederate to distract your audi-
ence (it’s easier to “see” a face talk
than it is to believe the voice comes
from an immobile object); -3 if the
audience has reason to be suspicious.
Veterinary/TL
IQ/Hard
Defaults: Animal Handling (any)-6,
Physician-5, or Surgery-5.
This is the ability to care for a sick
or wounded animal. You may take an
optional specialty (p. 169) in a particu-
lar type of animal.
Modifiers:  +5 if the animal knows
and trusts you; -2 or worse if the ani-
mal is of an unfamiliar type.
Weather Sense
see Meteorology, p. 209
Weird Science
IQ/Very Hard
Defaults: None.
This skill allows you to formulate
astonishing new crackpot scientific
theories that are far ahead of their
time . . . or at least utterly different
from the usual assumptions of your
tech level. You may attempt a Weird
Science roll whenever you work on a
new invention (see Chapter 17) or
investigate an existing  item of weird
technology (e.g., a UFO).
On a success, you get +5 on an
invention attempt (but only +1 if using
the Gadgeteer advantage, since
Gadgeteer already gives you favorable
die rolls for thinking “outside the
box”). If investigating weird technolo-
gy, success gives +2 to any skill roll
you make for this purpose – and the
GM might even allow a default skill
roll to operate the device!
On a critical success, you get these
bonuses  and  some incredible insight
into a totally different problem!
Critical failures are always spectacu-
lar, although not necessarily fatal or
even dangerous.
Whip
see Melee Weapon, p. 208
Wrestling
DX/Average
Defaults: None.
This skill represents training at
grappling and pinning. Roll against
the  higher  of DX or Wrestling to hit
with a grapple, or to make or resist a
takedown. Furthermore, if you know
Wrestling at DX+1 level, add +1 to ST
for the purpose of making or resisting
any choke, grapple, neck snap, take-
down, or pin, and whenever you
attempt to break free. Add +2 to ST for
Wrestling at DX+2 or better.
When you defend with bare hands,
Wrestling allows you to parry once
per turn. You must use both hands.
Your Parry score is (skill/2) + 3,
rounded down. This parry is at -3 vs.
weapons. For complete rules for par-
rying barehanded, see Parrying
Unarmed (p. 376).
Writing
IQ/Average
Default: IQ-5
This is the ability to write in a clear
or entertaining manner. A successful
roll means the work is readable and
accurate.
This is mostly useful to earn a liv-
ing or write for GURPS,  but can
sometimes help on adventures . . . or
after them. The report of a spy, soldier,
or private investigator is far more use-
ful if it is well-written!
Modifiers:  The time modifiers
under  Time Spent (p. 346) will often
apply; -5 if you are writing about an
unfamiliar subject; Language modi-
fiers (p. 24).
Zen Archery
IQ/Very Hard
Defaults: None.
Prerequisites: Trained By A Master
or Weapon Master, Bow at 18+, and
Meditation.
This skill allows you to strike diffi-
cult targets with ease when using a
bow. On a success, add up the penal-
ties for size and speed/range, and then
divide them by three (round down).
Modifiers: -10 if used instantly,
dropping to -5 after 1 turn of concen-
tration, -4 after 2 turns, -3 after 4
turns, -2 after 8 turns, -1 after 16
turns, and no penalty after 32 turns.
228 SKILLS












